Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 12:32:10 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:45 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      518643 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566547

Erasure-Correcting vs. Erasure-Detecting Codes for
the Full-Duplex Binary Erasure Relay Channel
Marina Ivashkina

Iryna Andriyanova

ETIS-UMR8051, ENSEA–
Univ. of Cergy-Pontoise – CNRS
Cergy-Pontoise, France
marina.ivashkina@ensea.fr

ETIS-UMR8051, ENSEA–
Univ. of Cergy-Pontoise – CNRS
Cergy-Pontoise, France
iryna.andriyanova@ensea.fr

Pablo Piantanida

Charly Poulliat

Dept. of Telecoms
Dept. of Telecoms
ENSEEIHT,
SUPELEC
Toulouse, France
Gif-sur-Yvette, France
pablo.piantanida@supelec.fr poulliat@enseeiht.fr

model, assuming the binary erasure channel for simplicity
of calculation. Two big classes of sparse-graph codes are
considered: good erasure-correcting codes and good erasuredetecting (i.e. bad erasure-correcting) codes. The efﬁciency of
both of them in the BM transmission model is studied, in order
to giving an insight what are the efﬁcient codes for the BM
model, and for the FD channel in particular.
A notation, ﬁrst used in the paper, is marked by blue.

Abstract—In this paper, the asymptotic iterative performance
of block-Markov, sparse-graph codes over the binary erasure
relay channel is investigated. Note that the full-duplex relay
channel is a particular case of the considered model. We obtain
two interesting results: a) the block-Markov structure does not
improve the asymptotic performance of good erasure-correcting
sparse-graph codes; b) under certain conditions, it does however
improve the asymptotic performance of good erasure-detecting
(i.e. bad erasure-correcting) sparse-graph codes.

I. I NTRODUCTION

II. O UR F RAMEWORK

Over the last decade, coding for cooperative communications using the Decode-and-Forward (DF) strategy has received a growing attention from both the coding and communication theory communities. Since the early works on
distributed turbo-codes [1], they have been numerous coding
schemes, proposed for different duplexing modes (half- (HD)
and full-duplex (FD) communications) and over different
channels (erasure, Gaussian or Rayleigh-fading models) [1][2]. Among the proposed schemes, the ones based on sparsegraph codes have been usually considered; their iterative performance was mainly evaluated over HD relay channels (asusming both orthorgonal and non-orthogonal multiple accesses at
the destination terminal). The most studied sparse-graph codes
for relay channels are bilayer Low-Density Parity-Check (BLDPC) codes [3]. The B-LDPC scheme gave rise to numerous
extensions and improvements (see [4] and references therein).
A recent extension of the B-LDPC scheme is spatially-coupled
B-LDPC codes [2].
An interesting question is whether the sparse-graph codes
perform well over the FD relay channel. Note that the FD
case is more involved than the HD case: the FD communication often assumes the non-orthogonal multiple access
at the destination end, thus implying a potential decrease
in performance of sparse-graph codes (see, for instance, [5]
where the observed performance of B-LDPC codes over the
FD binary erasure relay channel is not impressive).
What are the codes performing well over the FD relay
channel? Trying to respond to this question, we focus on
a more general transmission model, the so called blockMarkov (BM) DF scheme. Note that the FD relay channel is a
particular case of this model. We investigate the asymptotic
iterative performance of sparse-graph codes under the BM

A. Transmission Model
Consider a relay channel that consists of the source S,
communicating with the destination D, with the help of the
relay node R. For simplicity of analysis, the SR link is
assumed to be perfect and all links to D are modeled by binary
erasure channels. The channel is described by the operations
at S, R and D:
(R) At R, the DF protocol is assumed [6], i.e. R (perfectly)
receives the source message X1 , computes the bin message b, re-encodes b to message X2 (b), using a code CR ,
and sends X2 it to D during the next time slot.
(D) D receives erased versions of X1 and X2 , by orthogonal
reception (OR) or non-orthogonal reception (NOR):
(i) for OR, the erased versions of X1 and X2 (denote
them by YS and YR ) are received separately, via independent binary erasure channels with respective erasure
probabilities SD and RD ;
(ii) for NOR, the link from S and R to D is a multiple
access channel (MAC) with output Y . W.l.o.g, it is
assumed to be the sum mod-2 MAC [5] such that

w.p.(1 − SD )(1 − RD );
X1 ,


X ⊕ X , w.p. (1 −
1
2
SD ) RD ;
Y =
X2 ,
w.p. SD (1 − RD );



?,
w.p. SD RD ,
where SD and RD are probabilities, quantifying the
quality of SD and RD links.
(S) At S, let ω1 . . . ωM be M information packets to be sent
to D. Then, for each ω, S generates a message X, using

1

CS CR
0

CS CR

CS CR

block 1

block 2

block M

disjoint) only in the case of independent encoding at S and
OR at D.
Examples of CS CR :
1) If b(X) = ω, this corresponds to the bilayer-lengthened
(BL) construction from [3]. One thus deﬁnes the BLLDPC ensemble if both CS and CR codes are LDPC,
or the BL-LDGM ensemble (if both codes are LDGM1 );
2) If b is a linear combination of bits of X, this corresponds
to the bilayer-expurgated (BE) construction from [3].
Usually, |b| < |ω|. BE-LDPC or BE-LDGM ensembles
may be deﬁned in a similar way.
Examples of transmission functions T : Assume binary erasure channel. Denote by p and p2 the respective erasure
probabilities of messages X and X2 . Also, denote x = 1 − x.
¯
Then there are four cases:
1) Independent encoding + OR: p = SD , p2 = RD ;
2) Block-Markov encoding + OR:
p = 1 − ¯SD p2 , p2 = RD (1 − ¯SD p) ;
¯
¯
3) Independent encoding + NOR:
p = SD + ¯SD RD p2 , p2 = SD RD + ¯SD (1 − p RD );
¯
4) Block-Markov encoding + NOR:
p = SD + ¯SD ¯RD p2 , p2 = RD + ¯SD ¯RD p.

0

X2 , X

...

T1

T2

TM
Y or (YS , YR )

Fig. 1. General block-Markov structure to transmit M information messages
w. CR CS blocks are coding blocks, T blocks are transmission blocks.
Messages X and X2 are respectively presented by back and white nodes.
Grey nodes represent are received messages (couples (YS , YR ) for OR and
Y ’s for NOR).

ω

CS

X

b(X)

CR

X2

Fig. 2. Bilayer code CS CR : ω is the information word of code CS ; X and
X2 are codewords of codes CS and CR respectively; b is the information
word of code CR is the bin number for codewords of CS .

C. Decoding Schedules for the BM Scheme
One takes advantage of the memory of the block-Markov
X ⊕ X2 (bpast ), if block-Markov encoding used; scheme during decoding process. Let us consider two possible
X1 =
decoding schedules: joint iterative decoding and backward
X,
if independent encoding.
decoding.
Here bpast denotes the bin message computed for the
Joint iterative decoding is a version of the joint decoding
previous transmitted codeword X, and X2 (bpast ) is the algorithm, and it consists of the following steps:
codeword from code CR , corresponding to bpast . Also, (1) Set l = 1.
bpast = 0 at the beginning of the transmission.
(2) Perform one forward and one backward steps of decoding
(SR) If S and R transmit to D simultaneously, the communithrough the Markov chain and compute the estimates
cation is full-duplex (FD), and it is half-duplex (HD) if S
ˆ
ˆ (l)
X (l) (i) and X2 (i) for each block i, 1 ≤ i ≤ M .
and R transmit at different time intervals. In FD regime, (3) Set l := l + 1 and return to Step (2), until the maximum
at time slot i, R should be able to receive X1 (ωi ) from
number L of forward/backward decodings is reached.
S and to send X2 (bi (X(i − 1))) to D at the same time. (4) Compute ﬁnal estimates w’s given X (L) ’s and X (L) ’s.
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
Note that the HD communication is always OR at D, the
Note that the joint iterative decoding is optimal, if the local
FD one may be both OR (reception at separate frequency decoding of each C C block is based on the maximumS R
bands for SD and RD links) and NOR (same frequency likelihood decoding algorithm; it is therefore sub-optimal if
band).
CS CR block are based on sparse-graph codes and are decoded
iteratively.
B. General Block-Markov (BM) Scheme
Backward decoding is simply deﬁned as the ﬁrst backward
All versions of the transmission protocol from the previous
step of the joint iterative decoding.
section can be represented by means of a general block-Markov
For a decoding algorithm A, let us deﬁne the decoding
(BM) scheme, given in Fig.1. In this ﬁgure, the i-th block
success and the decoding convergence region:
CS CR represents the bilayer coding block [3] with two codes
Deﬁnition 1: Given the couple ( SD , RD ), the decoding
CS and CR , corresponding to information message ωi , and is said to be successful under decoding algorithm A if all
linked through the bin message b(X(i)) (see Fig.2). The block messages X(i), 1 ≤ i ≤ M , are successfully recovered.
Ti represents the transmission function, used at transmission Moreover, the convergence region Γ(A) , associated with A, is
i. This function depends on the reception mode at D (OR the ensemble of all couples (
SD , RD ) so that the decoding
or NOR), on the encoding procedure at S (block-Markov or is successful.
independent encoding) and on the channel model (e.g. binary
Remark that Γ(A) is in fact included into the ”true” conerasure channel).
vergence region, for which one would ask for recovering w’s
The general scheme in Fig.1 is a block-Markov chain of
1 Low-Density Generator Matrix
order 1. It degenerates to order 0 (i.e. al CS CR blocks become
a code CS , and transmits the following message X1 :

2

(l)

(

/F

SD ,

(l)

βi

βi
Ti

RD )

(

SD ,

RD )

Fig. 4. Block Ti and its input/output forward/backward erasure probabilities.

B. T Block: Transfer Functions Gfwd /Gbwd
Similarly to the previous case, output erasure probabilities at
forward/backward step l for transmission block Ti are linked
with input probabilities as (see Fig.4):

In order to perform the analysis, one should deﬁne the
evolution of erasure probabilities during forward and backward
steps of joint iterative decoding (while backward decoding is
a particular case of the joint iterative one).
A. CS CR Block: Transfer Functions F

(l)

αi
Ti

III. D ENSITY E VOLUTION OF THE BM S CHEME

fwd

(l)

αi

only, instead of recovering X’s in whole. However, numerical
results show that the two regions are very close, and the region
Γ(A) is much easier to manipulate.
In next sections, we ﬁnd convergence regions ΓBWD and
JNT
Γ
for respective backward and joint iterative decoding algorithms. Two cases are treated separately: erasure correcting
(EC) codes and erasure-detecting (ED) codes.

(l)

αi

bwd

(l)
βi

Consider the i-th block CS CR . During forward step l, one
computes the estimate of X2 (i), given the estimate of X(i)
from step l and the estimate of X2 (i) from step (l − 1) (see
(l)
Fig.2). We denote by αi−1 the erasure probability of X(i)
(l)
and by αi – the erasure probability of X2 (i) after forward
decoding. Similarly, during backward step l, one computes
the estimate of X(i), given the estimate of X2 (i) from step
l and the estimate of X(i) from step (l − 1). We denote
(l)
(l)
by βi the erasure probability of X2 (i) and by βi−1 – the
erasure probability of X(i) after backward decoding. These
four probabilities are shown in Fig.3.

=

Gfwd ,
SD

=

(l)

G

(l)

(3)

(l)
(βi ).

(4)

(αi ) = Gfwd (αi );

bwd

RD

(l)
(βi )
SD , RD

bwd

=G

where Gfwd and Gbwd are forward and backward transfer
functions for transmission block T .
In what follows, the subscript ( SD , RD ) is omitted.
C. Density Evolution Equations Using Transfer Functions
Density evolution equations for some BM schemes have
been ﬁrst derived in [5]. However, here we present them by
means of transfer functions F fwd , F bwd , Gfwd and Gbwd . Such
a representation is easier to understand as it is somewhat
similar to EXIT charts [8].
The density evolution of the BM scheme is given by:
(0)

βi−1

Gfwd (1), if 2 ≤ i ≤ M,
Gfwd (0), if i = 1,

(5)

(0)

CS CR block i
αi−1

=
=

Gbwd (1), if 1 ≤ i ≤ M − 1,
Gbwd (0), if i = M,

(6)

αi
βi

αi

βi

for l = 0 and
Fig. 3.
Block CS CR and related input/output erasure probabilities for
forward (α’s) and backward (β’s) steps.

αi

Now note that αi ’s, αi ’s, βi ’s and βi ’s are linked as follows:

βi

(l)

(l)

βi−1

=

(l)

(l)

fwd
Fβ (l−1) (αi−1 ) = F fwd (αi−1 );
(l)

(l)

bwd
Fα(l−1) (βi ) = F bwd (βi );

(l)

(7)

= Gbwd F bwd (βi+1 ) ;

(l)

(8)

for l > 0.
The density evolution at step l can be represented graphically. As an example , the evolution of α’s is given in Fig.5.

(1)

i

=

= Gfwd F fwd (αi−1 ) ;

(l)

αi

(l)

(2)

i−1

α(l)

where F fwd and F bwd are forward and backward transfer
functions for block CS CR . If CS CR is a sparse-graph bilayer
code, decoded iteratively, the transfer functions may be computed via corresponding BP EXIT curves (see, for instance,
Thm.3.120 [7]). Note that both F fwd and F bwd are indexed by
erasure probabilities from step (l − 1). It can be shown that:
Proposition 1: 1) Fx (y) is non-decreasing both with x and
with y; 2) F0 (0) = 0 and F1 (1) = 1.
The indices will be further omitted for simpliﬁcation.
We will further need the following quantity:
Deﬁnition 2: Given erasure probabilities and 2 , related
to messages X and X2 at two inputs of block CS CR , one
deﬁnes Γ( , 1 ) to be the convergence region of CS CR , i.e.
the ensemble of all couples ( , 2 ) so that the decoding of the
block CS CR is successful.

α(l) = F fwd (α(l) )

i=∞

α(l) = Gfwd (α(l) )
i=0
Fig. 5.

Evolution of

(l)
αi

α(l)
with i for some ﬁxed l > 0.

The joint iterative decoding converges asymptotically for
(∞)
(∞)
given couple ( SD, RD ), if at least one of α∞ and β∞ is 0.
(1)
The backward decoding converges asymptotically, if β∞ = 0.

3

IV. C ASE OF E RASURE -C ORRECTING (EC) C ODES

And follows directly that:
Theorem 2: ΓBWD ⊇ Γ and ΓJNT ⊇ Γ.
We obtain an interesting result here: the performance of
the BM scheme based on ED codes may be better than the
performance of one ED CS CR block. So, is it possible to attain
the theoretical limit by using this scheme, for any couple of
channel erasure probabilitiies? Unfortunately,
Theorem 3: The BM scheme based on ED codes is bounded
away from capacity for SD = 1.
Proof: W.l.o.g., consider OR. For SD = 1, one has
Gfwd (y) = 1 and Gbwd (y) = RD . Thus the BM scheme
is broken into separate blocks CS CR . So, ΓJNT = Γ, which is
strictly included into the capacity convergence region.
One can show that at another extreme point RD = 1,
the BM scheme is not bounded from the capacity. Therefore,
the use of an ED CS code may be beneﬁcial for asymptotic
performance of the overall BM scheme, while it is better to
keep the EC CR code. Such a construction is given in Section
VI. However, before it let us give an example of two ED codes,
in order to illustrate Theorem 2 and to show that indeed one
gets an improvement of the convergence region, if the blockMarkov encoding is used (i.e. the BM chain has memory > 1,
independently on the reception mode).

Consider the BM scheme based on two EC codes.
Deﬁnition 3: EC codes are codes so that, in the limit of
large codelengths n, the erasure probability after decoding x
given input erasure probability is 0 if < ∗ and is
0 for
≥ ∗ . ∗ is the decoding threshold.
Many known families of existing codes (e.g. convolutional
codes, LDPC codes, turbo codes etc.) are EC codes.
When the bilayer CS CR scheme is based on good EC codes,
then the following approximations are tight:
fwd
Fβ (α) ≈ 1{(α, β) ∈ Γ},

bwd
Fα (β) ≈ 1{(β, α) ∈ Γ}, (9)

namely F fwd and F bwd can be approximated by step functions.
Then the following holds:
Lemma 1: For a BM structure based on EC codes,
ΓBWD

=

Γ(Gfwd (1), Gbwd (0));

ΓJNT

=

Γ(Gfwd (1), Gbwd (0)) ∪ Γ(Gfwd (0), Gbwd (1)).

Main idea of the proof: Consider the forward step (the
backward step is similar). By Fig.1, the input message of
the 1st block CS CR is Gfwd (0), while the initial parameter
β = Gbwd (1). If (Gfwd (0), 1) ∈ Γ, then the output message
is 0, and the input message of the 2nd block CS CR is again
Gfwd (0). Therefore, one can show that the forward step of
decoding is successful if and only if the decoding of one
CS CR block with input parameters Gfwd (0) and Gbwd (1) is
successful.
Note that, for EC codes, the forward/backward evolution
has a different behaviour than illustrated in Fig.5: as the curve
F is a step function, then the convergence point is achieved
in only one step, and it is either (1, 1) (decoding failure) or
(0, 0) (decoding success).
It immediately follows that:
Theorem 1: For EC codes, ΓBWD ⊆ Γ and ΓJNT ⊆ Γ.
Therefore:
Corrollary 1: The necessary condition to design a capacityapproaching BM scheme based on EC codes, is to choose a
capacity-approaching CS CR bilayer code.

A. Example of a BM Scheme Based on ED Codes
Consider the example when the CS CR code is a BLLDGM code, i.e. two ED codes CS and CR are two LDGM
codes with respective degree distributions (λS (x), ρS (x)) and
(λR (x), ρR (x)). To improve ΓJNT , one can optimize distributions λS (x) and λR (x) (for simplicity, ﬁxed ρ’s are assumed):
imax

imax

λS,i /i

max
i=1

given

(∞)
(∞)
(α∞ , β∞ )

∈ Γ;

λS,i = 1;
i=1

λS,i ≥ 0; 1 ≤ i ≤ imax .
This is a non-linear optimization problem, and it can be solved
numerically (e.g. using blind random search optimization [9]).
Example 1: Let CR be a code taken from a regular (x4 , x4 )
LDGM ensemble, having the iterative decoding threshold
∗
= 0.313. Soving the optimization problem stated above,
we obtain

V. C ASE OF E RASURE -D ETECTING (ED) C ODES
Now consider the BM scheme based on two ED codes.
Deﬁnition 4: ED codes are codes so that, in the limit of
large codelengths n, the erasure probability after decoding x
smoothly increases with input erasure probability . So, if ∗
is the decoding threshold, then x( ∗ + ∆ ) = x( ∗ ) + ∆x with
∆x relatively small.
ED codes are typically bad erasure-correctors (e.g. LDGM
codes under iterative decoding), as their threshold ∗ lies far
from the theoretical limit. Using ED codes simply imply that
F fwd and F bwd are smoothly increasing with channel erasure
probabilities. So the forward/backward evolution of erasure
probabilities is smooth as well, as it is illustrated in Fig.5.
Similar as in the previous section:
Lemma 2: For ED codes, ΓBWD = Γ(Gfwd (1), Gbwd (0)) and
(∞)
(∞)
JNT
Γ
= Γ(α∞ , β∞ ).

λS (x) = 0.048x + 0.048x2 + 0.02x3 + 0.0196x4 + 0.046x5
+0.044x6 + 0.103x7 + 0.064x8 + 0.061x9 + 0.017x10
+0.116x11 + 0.089x12 + 0.1096x13 + 0.086x14 + 0.129x15 .
The upper boundary of ΓJNT of the obtained BM scheme,
with the block-Markov encoding, is given in Fig.6. Dashed
lines represent OR, full lines – NOR. Black curves are
computed upper boundaries; theoretical limits are drawn in
grey. Note that at RD = 1, the gap to capacity is very
small, around 0.003, due to the ED CR code and the BM
structure. The gap to capacity is large at SD = 1, which is
also consistent with our analysis.

4

SD

SD

, NOR
NOR
(3,6,128) LDPC, OR

RD

RD

Fig. 6. Upper boundary of ΓJNT for the BM scheme based on BL-LDGM
codes, for block-Markov encoding and OR/NOR.

Fig. 7. Upper boundary of ΓJNT of the BM scheme based on BE-LDGM
codes, for block-Markov encoding and OR/NOR.

VI. ED+EC B ILAYER C ONSTRUCTION

only concerns two extreme points

A possible way to design an efﬁcient bilayer CS CR code
in the BM scheme of memory > 1 is to choose the CR code
to be a (capacity-approaching) EC code and the CS code to
be an ED code. Let us consider the following construction:
Deﬁnition 5: Bilayer-Expurgated LDGM (BE-LDGM)
codes are bilayer CS CR codes such that CS and CR codes
are given respectively by an LDGM and an LDPC, and
b(X) = ω. Corresponding degree distributions are denoted
by (λS (x), ρS (x)) and (λR (x), ρR (x)).
This will be our design criterion:
Proposition 2: Consider a BE-LDGM ensemble, and let
∗
LDP C be the iterative threshold of the constituent LDPC
part. The BE-LDGM ensemble simultaneously approaches the
theoretical limit in both points SD = 1 and RD = 1 if
∗
LDP C
∗
LDP C

=
≥

th
SD ,
th
RD LS (1

− (1 −

−

th
SD )),

= 1 and

RD

= 1.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
M.I. was ﬁnanced by the DIM COREPHY project. Authors
thank K. Kasai for providing simulation results of spatiallycoupled bilayer codes.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown that one can design efﬁcient
sparse-graph bilayer codes, by choosing the CS code to be
erasure-detecting (ED) and making use of the block-Markov
encoding at S. Note that the construction behaves well for any
reception mode, OR or NOR, in contrast to all other bilayer
structures, which behave well for OR only. Whether or not one
can approach the capacity boundary with this construction is
still an open question.

(10)
th
SD )ρS (1

SD

R EFERENCES

(11)

[1] M. Valenti and B. Zhao, “Distributed turbo codes: towards the capacity
of the relay channel,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2003. VTC
2003-Fall. 2003 IEEE 58th, vol. 1, 2003, pp. 322 – 326 Vol.1.
[2] H. Uchikawa, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Spatially coupled ldpc codes
for decode-and-forward in erasure relay channel,” in Information Theory
Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on, 31 2011aug. 5 2011, pp. 1474 –1478.
[3] P. Razaghi and W. Yu, “Design of joint network-low density parity check
codes based on the EXIT charts,” Transactions on Information Theory,
IEEE, vol. 57, no. 10, Oct. 2007.
[4] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “Bilayer protograph codes
for half-duplex relay channels,” in Information Theory Proceedings
(ISIT), 2010 IEEE International Symposium on, 2010, pp. 948 –952.
[5] M. Ivashkina, I. Andriyanova, C. Poulliat, and P. Piantanida, “Blockmarkov ldpc scheme for half- and full-duplex erasure relay channel,”
in Information Theory, 2011. ISIT 2011. IEEE International Symposium
on, 31 July 2011-August 5 2011.
[6] T. Cover and A. Gamal, “Capacity theorems for the relay channel,”
Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 572–584,
Sep 1979.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Modern coding theory,” Cambridge
University Press, 2008.
[8] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 35, 1999.
[9] W. H. J. Gentle and Y. Mori, Handbook of Computational Statistics.
Springer, 2004.
[10] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the
erasure channel,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 48,
no. 12, pp. 3017 – 3028, dec 2002.

where th and th denote Shannon limits for R-D and S-D
SD
RD
links, and LS (x) is the node-perspective degree distribution
of variable nodes for the CS ensemble (i.e. LDGM).
Proof: For SD = 1, the CS CR performance is conditioned by the performance of the LDPC part (the LDGM is
not able to decode at all), so (10) follows directly. Further, if
RD = 1, then the CS CR decoding succeeds if the decoding
of the LDGM part has the output probability < ∗ C .
LDP
Example 2: Choose the CR part to be an LDPC ensemble
with a constant check degree and λ(x) taken from [10]. Such
an ensemble has the gap to capacity 10−3 over the BEC.
Choose the CS part to be the (x4 , x4 ) LDGM ensemble. Note
that (10) and (11) both hold. Upper boundaries of ΓJNT are
shown in Fig.7: dashed lines represent OR, full lines – NOR.
One can see that the obtained boundaries lie quite close to
theoretical limits. For comparison, the dotted curve represents
the upper boundary for the scheme with independent encoding
and OR, based on spatially-coupled (3,6,128) LDPC ensemble
from [2], which is one of efﬁcient codes for OR, known by
now. The boundary of our scheme (black dashed one) lies
below the dotted curve; however, any optimization of the BELDGM code have not been done yet – our design criterion

5

