Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.16:2331
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Wed May 16 23:31:43 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:01 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      293474 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569565561

Cooperative Diversity via Set-Partitioning in BICM:
Outage Analysis and Frame Interleaving
Lai Wei and Thomas E. Fuja
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
Email: {lwei1, tfuja}@nd.edu

Abstract—This paper considers cooperative diversity in the
context of bandwidth-efﬁcient modulation. Speciﬁcally, it analyzes a scenario in which high-order modulation – 16-QAM is
used for illustration – is used in a way that enables two partners
to cooperatively convey their data to a common destination. This
approach uses set partitioning so that “relayed” data selects a
sparse subset while “local” data selects the transmitted symbol
from that subset. An outage probability analysis is presented that
illustrates the advantage of this technique over the conventional
time-sharing approach to cooperative diversity; for 16-QAM,
coding gains range from 1.5 dB (for a spectral efﬁciency of
η = 0.5 bits/symbol) to 3.2 dB (for η = 1.5). Then, a variation on
this approach – in which codewords are spread out over multiple
frames (and multiple channel realizations) – is examined and
shown to provide a substantial gain at the cost of delay.

A

D

B

Fig. 1. Nodes A and B cooperate to convey their data to a common destination
Node D.

I. I NTRODUCTION

cooperation. Variants of coded cooperation have included:
algebraic superposition [5], in which the channel-encoded
local and relayed bits are XORed prior to modulation and the
relayed sequence is treated as a “scrambling pattern” at the
partner; and trellis pruning [6], in which local and relayed data
are multiplexed together prior to convolutional encoding, and
the partner uses its knowledge of the relayed data to “prune”
the trellis, deleting edges that are inconsistent with the known
values. The approaches in [5] and [6] offer three to four dB
of coding gain compared to the time sharing approach in [1].
All of the above references assume binary signaling. With
regard to bandwidth-efﬁcient modulation, [7] uses the in-phase
component of each QAM symbol to convey local data and
the quadrature component to convey relayed data; of course,
from the perspective of enhancing the partner-to-partner link,
this approach “wastes” the quadrature component much like
time-sharing “wastes” half of each partner’s transmission time.
Reference [8] overcomes this problem to some extent by using
set-partition (SP) labeling [9], albeit for uncoded transmission.
Recently, the authors [10] proposed the use of SP labeling in
conjunction with low-density parity check (LDPC) codes in a
bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) context for cooperative diversity. Other work on bandwidth-efﬁcient cooperation
includes [11], which considers design issues for cooperative
multiple trellis coded modulation (CMTCM) schemes, in
which the signal constellation is asymmetric and multiple
mappings are adopted among users. Most of the bandwidthefﬁcient cooperation techniques in the literature ﬁt within the

“Cooperative diversity” is the term used to describe techniques through which multiple sources in a wireless network
share their resources to achieve spatial diversity, thus ameliorating the effects of multipath fading. Figure 1 shows a
canonical example involving two partners, Node A and Node
B, along with a common destination Node D. In this example,
each partner acts as both a source – generating, encoding, and
transmitting data that is “local” to that node – and as a relay,
(re-)transmitting, whenever possible, those data packets that
originated at the other partner.
Assume that transmission time is slotted, with Node A
transmitting in the ﬁrst half of each time slot and Node B
in the second half. When (for instance) Node A transmits, it
must dedicate some of its resources to transmitting its own
locally-generated data and some of its resources to relaying
Node B’s most recently transmitted data – assuming Node
A was able to recover that data. There have been several
approaches put forward for carrying out these dual roles. In [1]
each partner splits its transmission time in half, transmitting
ﬁrst only local data and then only relayed data – an approach
we refer to as time-sharing. In contrast, both [2] and [3] use
signal superposition, partitioning the transmitted power (but
not the transmission time) between the two roles.
Another trend in cooperation is the integration of relaying
and channel coding – what is referred to in [4] as coded
This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation
under grant CCF-0830650.

1

structure of coded cooperation; examples of turbo coding,
LDPC coding, lattice coding, etc. are summarized in [11].
This paper provides new insight into the LDPC-based
cooperative system in [10]. It does this by developing outage
probabilities that assume capacity-approaching codes on each
link in the system and comparing those outage probabilities
with ones obtained assuming more conventional (time-sharing)
cooperation; this yields a more fundamental understanding of
the beneﬁts of this approach than what is provided by the
simulation results in [10]. This paper also shows how the
approach proposed in [10] can be substantially improved by
interleaving codewords across channel realizations.
For convenience, the system from [10] is reviewed in
Section II, while Section III analyzes its outage behavior.
Section IV describes and analyzes a technique by which
additional interleaving provides additional performance (at the
cost of delay), and Section V provides some conclusions.

( 0111)

( 0011)

( 0101)

( 0001)

(1111)

(1011)

(1101)

(1001)

( 0110 )

( 0010 )

( 0100 )

( 0000 )

(1110 )

(1010 )

(1100 )

(1000 )

(a) 16-QAM

(b) 64-QAM

Fig. 2. The SP labeling for 16-QAM and 64-QAM modulation. Here, a
constellation of 22m points is partitioned (by the m high-order bits in each
symbol label) into 2m sparse subsets, each containing 2m points. The solid
signal points form one such subset.

bits) select a particular signal point from the subset. The
modulated result, i.e., the transmitted frame consisting of n/m
QAM symbols, is called sA (t). This encoding-multiplexingmodulating process can be generalized to 22m+1 -QAM/PSK
modulation as well, using 4-dimensional signaling [10].
On the other hand, if iB (t − 1) has not been decoded
L
successfully, Node A works in non-cooperative mode. In this
case, only iA (t) is encoded using a systematic LDPC code of
L
A
rate R/2 = k/2n to generate the 2n-bit C A (t) = CL (t).
(We refer to the rate-R/2 code as the “low-rate” code in
contrast to the “high-rate” code used in cooperative mode.)
The modulator in this case adopts the conventional Gray
labeling and generates the n/m QAM symbols sA (t) from
A
C A (t) = CL (t).
Thus, in each frame, a k-bit packet of local bits is represented with n/m QAM symbols, so the spectral efﬁciency is
η = k/(n/m) = Rm bits per QAM symbol.
When Node B attempts to decode iA (t), it must ﬁrst
L
determine the transmission mode of Node A; we assume that
this side information is available.1 If sA (t) contains both iA (t)
L
and iB (t − 1), then Node B’s knowledge of iB (t − 1) enables
L
L
the receiver to initialize the LDPC decoder based on sparse
sub-constellations with larger minimum spacing, and these
more reliable bit-wise soft values result in a higher probability
of decoding success.
With regard to the destination: Node D estimates iA (t) from
L
A
s (t) and (potentially) sB (t) – i.e., the frames transmitted
by Node A and Node B during time slot t – and how it
does so depends on which of those two frames contain (or do
not contain) relayed data. Speciﬁcally, there are four possible
states in which iA (t) will be decoded:
L
1) State S0 : sA (t) contains iA (t) but not iB (t − 1), and
L
L
sB (t) contains iB (t) but not iA (t).
L
L
2) State S1 : sA (t) contains iA (t) but not iB (t − 1), and
L
L
sB (t) contains both iB (t) and iA (t).
L
L

II. C OOPERATION VIA SP-BICM
Consider the cooperative scenario in Figure 1. As noted
above, we assume that transmission time is slotted, and during
each time slot, Node A transmits for the ﬁrst half-slot followed
by Node B during the second half-slot. All the channels
are corrupted by independent, blockwise Rayleigh fading and
complex additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with the
same variance N0 . Perfect channel information (i.e., the block
fading factor and N0 ) is available to each receiver, but not to
either transmitter. Without loss of generality, we describe the
operations of the transmitter at Node A, the receiver at Node
B and the receiver at Node D, all during time slot t.
As a source, Node A generates k new local bits each time
slot; designate this k-bit packet by iA (t) ∈ {0, 1}k . On the
L
other hand, whether or not Node A will serve as a relay
during slot t depends on whether it has successfully decoded
iB (t − 1); we assume that Node A is always able to determine
L
whether it has successfully decoded iB (t − 1) – something it
L
can accomplish with high probability by checking the parity
checks associated with the LDPC code described below.
If the packet iB (t − 1) has been decoded successfully,
L
Node A works in cooperative mode. In this case, iA (t) and
L
A
A
iA (t) = iB (t − 1) are encoded into CL (t) and CR (t),
R
L
respectively, using the same systematic rate-R = k/n LDPC
code. If 22m -QAM/PSK modulation is used, Node A then
forms the transmitted bit sequence C A (t) by multiplexing
A
A
A
CL (t) and CR (t): it takes, in turn, m bits from CR (t) and
A
m bits from CL (t), thereby forming a sequence of 2n bits in
A
which the ﬁrst m bits are from CL (t), the second m bits are
A
A
from CR (t), the third m bits are from CL (t), the fourth m
A
bits are from CR (t), etc. (Note this requires that m|n.)
These 2n bits are then transmitted using 22m -QAM/PSK
modulation with a mapper based on set partitioning, as illustrated in Figure 2(a) for m = 2 (16-QAM) and in Figure 2(b)
for m = 3 (64-QAM). The m high-order bits (which, as
a result of the multiplexer, are assigned to the relayed bits)
partition the constellation into 2m sparse subsets of size 2m ,
and the m lower order bits (which are assigned to the local

1 As described in [6], in practice, this information can be obtained using
a heavily-protected ﬂag bit transmitted along with the frame. Alternatively,
the receiver can use the error-detecting capability of the channel codes to
determine the transmission mode by seeing which of the modes yields a
reliable packet – or, in the case when none of the modes do, indicates an
unrecoverable packet.

2

3) State S2 : sA (t) contains both iA (t) and iB (t − 1), and
L
L
sB (t) contains iB (t) but not iA (t).
L
L
4) State S3 : sA (t) contains both iA (t) and iB (t − 1), and
L
L
sB (t) contains both iB (t) and iA (t).
L
L
Details of the decoding algorithm at Node D are provided
in [10]. However, two relevant points:
1) Cooperative diversity is available in states S1 and S3
and can be exploited during the initialization of the
LDPC decoder via maximal ratio combining (MRC):
soft values for the same bit (one “local copy” and one
“relayed copy”) are added directly, so that more robust
initialization is obtained.
2) The power of the SP labeling can be exploited in state S2
and S3 . If iB (t−1) has been successfully decoded in the
L
last decoding round, then Node D is able to demodulate
A
A
CL (t) more reliably since CR (t) is already known.

B. At the Destination Node
The outage at the destination is the system outage; an
inability to recover a packet at the destination means the packet
is lost. The destination’s outage probability depends on the
state in which the destination’s receiver is operating – and
that state, in turn, depends on the outages that occurred in the
associated partner-to-partner transmission.
Recall that there are four possible states in which Node D
can operate:
1) State S0 : In state S0 there is no relayed version of
the data available, and the frame transmitted from the source
node was transmitted in non-cooperative mode using a lowrate code. Thus the outage probability is given by
P {C 16QAM (γS → D ) < η},
where γS → D is the (randomly generated) SNR on the sourceto-destination link.
2) State S1 : In state S1 the frame from the source is sent
in non-cooperative mode (using a low-rate code); moreover,
that same data is also relayed by the partner operating in
cooperative mode (using a high-rate code). Both frames are
used for decoding. Let RC = η/m denote the code rate used
by the source in cooperative mode, and let RNC = RC /2
denote the code rate used in non-cooperative mode. Assume
that both of the codes are systematic, as in [10].
So the k-bit data packet of interest is represented by two
frames of QAM symbols. In the ﬁrst frame there are k/η
QAM symbols, and they are all selected by the low-rate noncooperative code; in the second frame there are also k/η QAM
symbols, but only the two high-order bits of each symbol is
selected by the high-rate cooperative code. (The two low-order
bits are speciﬁed locally by the partner.) We assume in the
following analysis that the two low-order bits of each QAM
symbol in this second frame are known to the destination’s
decoder. This “genie-provided” side information yields a lower
bound on the outage probability, and it is side information
that can be obtained in a number of ways, including “looking
ahead” to future (reliable) frames and using the values therein
to “work backwards” [10].
Summarizing, in state S1 the destination’s decoder has the
following information available about the k-bit packet iA (t):
L
A
• Two (noisy) versions of iL (t), both appearing in the
systematic part of two different codewords. In the direct
(source-to-destination) transmission the k bits of iA (t)
L
completely select k/2m different QAM symbols, while
in the relay-to-destination transmission they select the
m(= 2 for 16-QAM) high-order bits of k/m different
QAM symbols.
• One (noisy) version of the parities generated by the noncooperative encoder, transmitted using 16-QAM on the
source-to-destination link.
• One (noisy) version of the parities generated by the
cooperative encoder, transmitted using the two highorder bits of the 16-QAM constellation on the relay-todestination link.

III. O UTAGE B EHAVIOR OF THE SP-BICM S YSTEM
This section analyzes the outage behavior of the SP-BICM
system from Section II; that is, we assume that capacityachieving channel codes are used on each link and determine
the probability that the channel realizations are insufﬁcient to
deliver reliable information to the destination.
An “outage” occurs over a particular link when the realized
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) does not provide enough capacity
to convey information at the required rate; a system outage
occurs when one or more link outages combine to prevent
the reliable recovery of a packet at the destination. To this
end, we describe the various outage events that, taken together,
characterize the system outage performance. (We use 16-QAM
modulation as the exemplar, but the same approach can be
employed with any constellation with 22m symbols or – using
the techniques from [10] – with 22m+1 symbols.)
A. At the Partner Nodes
Each partner conveys information to the other partner in
either cooperative or non-cooperative mode; if the transmitted frame is sent in non-cooperative mode, then the outage
probability is given by
P {C 16QAM (γS → R ) < η}.
Here, η is the desired spectral efﬁciency and C 16QAM (γS → R )
is the capacity of the 16-QAM constellation with a (randomly
generated) source-to-relay SNR of γS → R . If the transmitted
frame is sent in cooperative mode, because the relayed bits
are known to the partner, the outage probability is given by
P {C FH (γS → R ) < η}.
Here, “FH” refers to the sub-constellation that is obtained
when the two high-order bits in each label – drawn from
the relayed codeword, and thus known to the partner – are
ﬁxed. (So “FH” refers to “ﬁxed high-order”.) There are (for
16-QAM) four such subsets, each containing four symbols;
however, they are shifted versions of one another and have
the same capacity.

3

The system is in outage if there is insufﬁcient SNR on
the various links to support the decoding of iA (t) from the
L
information above. This yields an outage probability of

ﬁrst frame are available depends on the outcome of the
previous decoding round. If the previous decoding round was
successful, then the outage probability is

16QAM
P {RNC CFL, FL (γS → D , γR → D )

FH
P {CFL (γS → D , γR → D ) < η}.

+(1 − RNC )C 16QAM (γS → D )
+(1 − RC )C FL (γR → D ) < η}.

If the previous decoding round was unsuccessful, then the
outage probability is
UH
P {CFL (γS → D , γR → D ) < η}.

In the above, “FL” refers to the sub-constellations obtained
by ﬁxing the genie-provided m low-order bits in each QAM
label. (So “FL” = “ﬁxed low-order”.) In the 16-QAM mapping
shown in Figure 2(a), these sub-constellations take the form
of 4-ary constellations restricted to one quadrant – e.g., if
the two low order bits are “11” then the sub-constellation
consists of the four symbols in the upper left quadrant.
In the above, C FL (γR → D ) refers to the capacity of this
sub-constellation with an SNR equal to γR → D . Similarly,
16QAM
CFL, FL (γS → D , γR → D ) refers to a multidimensional signaling scheme in which the same message is conveyed on two
parallel channels – on 16-QAM operating at an SNR of γS → D
and on the channel deﬁned by the two high-order bits in the
labels of two consecutive 16-QAM symbols, both at an SNR
of γR → D .
3) State S2 : In state S2 , there is no help from the relay,
and the frame from the source is sent in cooperative mode
(using a high-rate code). In this case, the outage probability
depends on whether the destination has been able to recover
the previous packet – the one whose relayed version was
sent concurrently with the packet being decoded. (Put in the
notation of Section II: if the destination has already recovered
iB (t − 1), then it will decode iA (t) from the sparse subL
L
A
constellations speciﬁed by CR (t). Otherwise, it will decode
iA (t) from the full 16-QAM constellation.)
L
So if the relayed packet is known, the outage probability is
given by

The labels “FH” and “UH” refer, as before, to the status of
the high-order bits: they are either ﬁxed (because they were
decoded in the previous round) or they are unknown (because
they were not). The label “FL” reﬂects the assumption that
the low-order bits in the second frame are genie-provided and
thus ﬁxed.
Given the derivations above, the outage performance of
the SP-BICM system may be evaluated through Monte Carlo
simulation; by sequentially generating a sequence of link SNR
values and determining which outage events occur, the system
outage probability can be determined.
Figure 3 illustrates the outage probabilities for the 16-QAM
system described above at three different spectral efﬁciencies
– η = 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 bits per QAM symbol. Also included
are the analogous outage probabilities for the conventional
time-sharing approach to cooperation. It is observed that the
proposed approach enjoys a coding gain of approximately 1.5
dB (η = 0.5), 2.2 dB (η = 1.0) and 3.2 dB (η = 1.5) for an
outage probability of 10−2 .

Outage Probability

10

P {C FH (γS → D ) < η}.
If the relayed packet is not known, then the destination
must recover the packet from a single high-rate codeword
transmitted in the two low-order bits of consecutive QAM
symbols where the two high-order bits are unknown – e.g.,
for 16-QAM, there are four symbols that represent “00” in
the two low-order bits, four symbols that represent “01,”, etc.
We use the label “UH” (= “unknown high-order) to designate
this modulation scheme, and arrive at the outage probability

10

10

10

0

time−sharing, η=0.5
SP−BICM, η=0.5
time−sharing, η=1
SP−BICM, η=1
time−sharing, η=1.5
SP−BICM, η=1.5

−1

−2

−3

0

2

4

6

8

10
12
Average E /N
b

14

16

18

20

0

Fig. 3. Outage probabilities of the SP-BICM approach at the destination:
16QAM, η = 0.5, 1 and 1.5 bits/symbol.

Figure 4 provides results for a ﬁxed spectral efﬁciency: η =
1.0 bits per 16-QAM symbol. These results compare outage
probabilities with the frame error rates obtained using LDPC
codes operating with k = 1000-bit packets. Also included are
comparative results for time-sharing and for non-cooperative
systems in which each partner never cooperates but rather
consistently uses a low-rate code with Gray mapping.

P {C UH (γS → D ) < η}.
4) State S3 : Both the frame from the source node and
the frame from the partner node are in cooperative mode, so
the destination gets to observe noisy versions of two highrate-codewords – the ﬁrst transmitted in the low-order bits
of QAM symbols on the source-to-destination link and the
second transmitted in the high-order bits of QAM symbols on
the relay-to-destination link.
We assume, as before, that the low-order bits in the second
frame are genie-provided; whether the high-order bits in the

IV. VARIATION : F RAME I NTERLEAVING
The SP-BICM scheme described and analyzed above transmits each codeword over a single channel realization; the
diversity comes because two codewords representing the same
data are transmitted – once as local data and the other as

4

0

10
10

10

10

0

−1

Frame Error Rate

Frame Error Rate/Outage Probability

10

−2

−3

0

FER: non−cooperation
FER: time−sharing
outage: time−sharing
FER: SP−BICM
outage: SP−BCIM

2

4

6

8
10
12
Average E /N (dB)
b

14

16

18

•

•

−2

20
10

−3

0

SP−BICM: d=1
d−SP−BICM: d=2
d−SP−BICM: d=4
d−SP−BICM: d=8

2

4

6

8

10
12
Average E /N
b

14

16

18

20

0

Fig. 5. The d-SP-BICM approach, FER comparison at Node D: 16QAM,
η = 1 bit/symbol, k = 1000.

relayed data – but each codeword “sees” only a single channel
realization. In this section we propose splitting codewords over
multiple channel realizations; if this approach were taken to
its logical extreme – in which each bit in every codeword
is transmitted over a different channel realization – then the
result would be the “true” bit-interleaved coded modulation
(BICM) model considered by Caire et al. in [12].
Consider the following revision to Node A’s transmission
during time slot t.

•

10

−1

0

Fig. 4. Comparison of SP-BICM outage probabilities with frame error rates
obtained with LDPC codes operating on k = 1000-bit packets: 16QAM,
η = 1 bit/symbol.

•

10

V. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper analyzes the outage behavior of a bandwidthefﬁcient cooperative scheme recently proposed by the authors.
This analysis afﬁrms earlier simulation results indicating that
the proposed scheme has a signiﬁcant coding gain (i.e, up to
3.2 dB) compared to more conventional cooperation schemes
based on time-sharing. Also included is a variation on this
approach with signiﬁcant performance improvement at the
expense of additional decoding delay at the destination node.

C A (t) – i.e., the multiplexed codeword(s) generated by
Node A – is still modulated onto sA (t) which is now
referred to as the codeword frame.
sA (t) is divided into d parts of equal length: sA (t, 1),
sA (t, 2), . . . , sA (t, d); the component sA (t, i) is referred
to as an “atom frame” and will be transmitted in time
slot t + i − 1. The parameter d is referred to as the frame
division factor.
The actual transmitted frame sA (t) is the concatenation
trans
of the atom frames sA (t − d + 1, d), sA (t − d + 2, d − 1),
. . . , sA (t, 1), which means that the transmission time of
Node A is divided into d parts and “shared” by atom
frames generated in successive time slots.
A
If C A (t) is generated in cooperative mode, CR (t) is
encoded from iB (t − d), i.e., the decoding delay at the
L
receiving partner is d time slots.

R EFERENCES
[1] J. N. Laneman, D. N. C. Tse, and G. W. Wornell, “Cooperative Diversity
in Wireless Networks: Efﬁcient Protocols and Outage Behavior,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 50, No. 12, pp. 3062-3080,
December 2004.
[2] A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User Cooperation Diversity,
Part I and Part II,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 51,
No. 11, pp. 1927-1948, November 2003.
[3] E. G. Larsson and B. R. Vojcic, “Cooperative transmit diversity based
on superposition modulation,” IEEE Communications Letters, Vol. 9,
pp. 778-780, September 2005.
[4] T. E. Hunter and A. Nosratinia, “Diversity through coded cooperation,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 5, pp. 283-289,
Feburary 2006.
[5] L. Xiao, T. Fuja J. Kliewer, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “A Network Coding
Approach to Cooperative Diversity,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, Vol. 53, No. 10, pp. 3714-3722, October 2007.
[6] S. V. Maiya and T. E. Fuja, “Cooperation via Trellis Pruning,” IEEE
Trans. on Communications, Vol. 59, No. 6, pp. 1563-1569, June 2011.
[7] L. Jing, G. Jian Hua, Y. Wang, and H. Yao, “Performance Analysis and
Partner Selection for Cooperative Diversity Based on MQAM Modulation,” Science China, Vol. 53, No. 5, pp. 1044-1055, May 2010.
[8] S. Nagaraj and M. Bell, “Analysis Techniques for Coded Modulation
Based Cooperation Protocols”, in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, U.S., 2006.
[9] G. Ungerboeck, “Channel Coding with Multilevel/Phase Signals,” IEEE
Trans. on Info. Theory, Vol. IT-28, No. 1, pp. 55-67, January 1982.
[10] L. Wei and T. Fuja, “Two New Approaches to Bandwidth-Efﬁcient
Partnering for Cooperative Diversity,” to appear in the Proceedings of the
2012 Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
Paris, April 2012.
[11] J. Li and A. Stepanov, “Cooperative Multiple Trellis Coded Modulation,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 57, No. 3, pp. 688-696,
March 2009.
[12] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 44, No. 3, pp. 927946, May 1998.

As a result, at high SNR, each codeword is likely to be
transmitted to Node D over 2d i.i.d. channel realizations – d
realizations as local data and d realizations as relayed data.
Improvement of the system performance is obtained at the
expense of decoding delay which is typically 2d time slots
at Node D; fortunately, the performance gain is signiﬁcant
even if d is relatively small. We refer to this modiﬁed system
as the d-SP-BICM system. The original SP-BICM system is
obviously a special case in which the frame division factor is
d = 1.
Figure 5 displays the simulation results for the d-SP-BICM
approach, in which d varies from 1 (the SP-BICM system),
to 2, 4 and 8. As expected, the diversity order increases as d
increases, and the performance gain is signiﬁcant, for example,
approximately 3.0 dB from d = 2 to d = 4 for a FER of 10−2 .

5

