Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Thu May 17 21:33:21 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:28 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      402075 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566809

Quantized Min-Sum Decoders with Low Error
Floor for LDPC Codes
Xiaojie Zhang and Paul H. Siegel
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Email:{ericzhang, psiegel}@ucsd.edu

decoder also increases the decoding complexity relative to the
original decoding algorithms.
In ﬁxed-point implementation of iterative MP decoding,
efforts were also made to improve the the error-rate performance in the waterfall region and/or error-ﬂoor region by
optimizing parameters of uniform quantization [9]–[12]. Zhao
et al. studied the effect of the message clipping and uniform
quantization on the performance of the min-sum decoder in
waterfall region, and heuristically optimized the number of
quantization bits and the quantization step size for selected
LDPC codes. In [10], a dual mode adaptive uniform quantization scheme was proposed to better approximate the logtanh function used in sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoding.
Speciﬁcally, for magnitudes less than 1, all quantization bits
were used to represent the fractional part; for magnitudes
greater than or equal to 1, all bits were dedicated to the
representation of the integer part. In [11], [12], Zhang et al.
proposed a conceptually similar idea to increase precision in
the quantization of the log-tanh function. Uniform quantization
was applied to messages generated by both variable nodes
and check nodes, but the quantization step sizes used in the
two cases were separately optimized. We note, however, that
none of these modiﬁed quantization schemes were primarily
intended to signiﬁcantly increase the saturation level, or range,
of quantized messages, and in their reported simulation results,
error ﬂoors can still be clearly observed.
In this work, we investigate the cause of error ﬂoors in
binary LDPC codes from the perspective of the MP decoder
implementation, with special attention to limitations that decrease the numerical accuracy of messages passed during
decoding. Based upon an analysis of the decoding process
in the vicinity of an EPS, we propose a novel quantization
method, (q + 1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization, that does not
require a modiﬁcation of either the decoding update rules or
the graphical code representation upon which the iterative MP
decoder operates. The proposed quantization method has an
extremely large saturation level, a property that, to the best
of our knowledge, distinguishes if from other quantization
techniques for iterative MP decoding that have appeared in
the literature. We present simulation results for min-sum decoding and some of its variants that demonstrate a signiﬁcant
reduction in the error ﬂoors of two representative LDPC codes,
with no increase in the decoding complexity. Similar results,
not included in this paper due to space constraints, verify

Abstract—The error ﬂoor phenomenon observed with LDPC
codes and their graph-based, iterative, message-passing (MP)
decoders is commonly attributed to the existence of error-prone
substructures in a Tanner graph representation of the code.
Many approaches have been proposed to lower the error ﬂoor
by designing new LDPC codes with fewer such substructures or
by modifying the decoding algorithm. In this paper, we show
that one source of the error ﬂoors observed in the literature may
be the message quantization rule used in the iterative decoder
implementation. We then propose a new quantization method
to overcome the limitations of standard quantization rules.
Performance simulation results for two LDPC codes commonly
found to have high error ﬂoors when used with the ﬁxed-point
min-sum decoder and its variants demonstrate the validity of
our ﬁndings and the effectiveness of the proposed quantization
algorithm.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been the
focus of much research over the past decade as a consequence of their near Shannon-limit performance under iterative
message-passing (MP) decoding [1]. However, the error ﬂoor
phenomenon has hindered the adoption of LDPC codes and
iterative decoders in some applications requiring very low error
rates. Roughly speaking, an error ﬂoor is an abrupt change in
the slope of the error-rate performance curve of an MP decoder
in the high SNR region. Since many important applications,
such as data storage and high-speed digital communication,
often require extremely low error rates, the study of error ﬂoors
in LDPC codes remains of considerable practical, as well as
theoretical, interest.
The most common way to improve the error ﬂoor performance of LDPC codes has been to redesign the codes to have
Tanner graphs with large girth and without small error-prone
substructures (EPSs), such as near-codewords [2], trapping
sets [3], or absorbing sets [4]. Another approach has been
to modify the standard iterative decoding algorithms. In [5], a
post-processing decoder was proposed to improve performance
by matching the conﬁguration of unsatisﬁed check nodes
(CNs) to precomputed trapping sets. The post-processing approaches proposed in [6], [7] increase or decrease the reliability of messages from certain nodes. A bi-mode erasure decoder
to reduce error ﬂoors due to small size EPSs was introduced
in [8]. All these modiﬁed decoders either change the message
update rules at check nodes or require extra information from
an auxiliary code. Adding post-processing stages to the MP

1

graph G is a tree graph constructed by choosing variable
node v ∈ V as its root and then recursively adding edges
and leaf nodes to the tree that participate in the iterative
message-passing decoding during k iterations. To each vertex
that is created in Tk (v), we associate the corresponding node
update function in G.
Let D(u) be the set of all descendants of the vertex u in a
given computation tree.
Deﬁnition 3 (separation assumption): Given a Tanner
graph G and a subgraph S induced by a trapping set, a
variable node v ∈ V1 is said to be k-separated if, for at least
one neighboring degree-one check node c ∈ C1 of v in S,
no variable node v ∈ VS belongs to D(c) ⊂ Tk (v). If every
v ∈ V1 is k-separated, the subgraph S is said to satisfy the
k-separation assumption.
With the separation assumption, the descendants of c ∈ C1
are separated from all the nodes in the trapping set, meaning
that messages originating from the trapping set would not
cycle back through check node c within k iterations. We
note that the separation assumption is much weaker than
the isolation assumption in [14] – the separation assumption
applies only to VNs v ∈ V1 and their neighboring CNs in C1 .
To get further insight into the connection between trapping
sets and decoding failures of iterative MP decoders, we consider the min-sum decoder, whose VN and CN update rules we
now brieﬂy recall. A VN vi receives input message Lch from
i
the channel, which can be the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of
the corresponding channel output. Denote by Li→j and Lj→i
the messages sent from vi to cj and from cj to vi , respectively,
and denote by N (k) the set of neighboring nodes of VN vk
(or CN ck ). Then, the message sent from vi to cj in min-sum
decoding is given by

the applicability of the new quantization method to other MP
decoding algorithms, such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA)
often used in belief-propagation (BP) decoding.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we investigate the impact that message quantization can have on MP decoder performance and the error
ﬂoor phenomenon. In Section III, we propose an enhanced
quantization method intended to overcome the limitations
imposed by traditional quantization rules. In Section IV, we
incorporate the new quantizer into various versions of minsum decoding and, through computer simulation of several
LDPC codes known for their high error ﬂoors, demonstrate
the signiﬁcant improvement in error-rate performance that this
affords. Section V concludes the paper.
II. E RROR F LOOR OF LDPC C ODES
The term trapping set proposed by Richardson [3] is operationally deﬁned as a subset of variable nodes (VNs) that
is susceptible to errors under a certain iterative MP decoder
over an MBIOS channel. Hence, this concept depends on
both the channel and the decoding algorithm. To facilitate our
discussion, we deﬁne the term absolute trapping set from a
graph-theoretic perspective, independent of the channel and
the decoder. Let G = (V ∪ C, E) denote the Tanner graph of
a binary LDPC code with the set of VNs V = {v1 , . . . , vn },
the set of CNs C = {c1 , . . . , cm }, and the set of edges E.
Deﬁnition 1 (absolute trapping set): A subset of V ∪ C
is an (a, b) absolute trapping set if there are b odd-degree
check nodes in the subgraph induced by a variable nodes, the
subgraph is connected, and it has at least one check node of
degree one.
It is worth noting that the deﬁnition of absolute trapping
set is slightly different from the conventional generalized
deﬁnition of trapping set [5] of which a stopping set is a
special case. By requiring at least one check node of degree
one, we exclude stopping sets from our deﬁnition of absolute
trapping set. As we will discuss later in this section, these
degree-one check nodes are essential because they are able to
pass correct extrinsic messages into the trapping set. In the
literature, almost all trapping sets of interest have degree-one
check nodes, and therefore, are absolute trapping sets. Hence,
unless indicated, all trapping sets referred to in this paper are
absolute trapping sets as well.
Before introducing the main results, we ﬁrst present some
important notations and deﬁnitions. Let S be the induced
subgraph of an (a, b) trapping set contained in G with VN
set VS ⊆ V and CN set CS ⊆ C. Let C1 ⊆ CS be the set of
degree-one CNs in the subgraph S, and let V1 ⊆ VS be the
set of neighboring VNs of CNs in C1 . We refer to a message
of an edge adjacent to variable node v as a correct message
if its sign reﬂects the correct value of v, and as an incorrect
message otherwise.
In analogy to the deﬁnition of computation tree in [13], we
deﬁne a k-iteration computation tree as follows.
Deﬁnition 2 (k-iteration computation tree): A k-iteration
computation tree Tk (v) for an iterative decoder in the Tanner

Li→j = Lch +
i

Lj

→i

,

(1)

j ∈N (i)\j

and the message from CN j to VN i is computed as


Lj→i = 
i ∈N (j)\i

sign(Li →j ) ·

min

i ∈N (j)\i

|Li →j |.

(2)

It can been seen from (1) and (2) that the min-sum decoding
algorithm is linear, meaning that linearly scaling all input
messages from the channel would not affect the decoding
performance.
Theorem 1: Let G be the Tanner graph of a variable-regular
LDPC code that contains a subgraph S induced by a trapping
set. When S satisﬁes the k-separation assumption and when
the messages from the BSC to all VNs outside S are correct,
the min-sum decoder can successfully correct all erroneous
VNs in S, provided k is large enough.
Proof: Assume VN vr ∈ V1 in S is k-separated and
the corresponding k-iteration computation tree is Tk (vr ). Let
cr ∈ C1 be the neighboring degree-one CN of vr in S. By assumption, all descendants of cr in Tk (vr ) receive correct initial
messages from the BSC. Denote the subtree starting with CN

2

cr as T (cr ). All VN nodes in T (cr ) receive correct channel
messages and these messages have the same magnitude.
Now, with the VN/CN update rules of the min-sum decoder,
we analyze the messages sent from the descendants of cr in
T (cr ). First, according to the CN update rule described in (2),
all messages received by a VN from its children CNs in T (cr )
must have the same sign as the message received from the
channel by this VN, because all the messages passed in T (cr )
are correct. Moreover, since the LDPC code is variable-regular
and all the channel messages from the BSC have the same
magnitude, it can be shown that, for the min-sum decoder, all
incoming messages received by a VN from its children CNs in
T (cr ) must have the same magnitude as well. Let |Ll | be the
magnitude of the messages sent by the VNs whose shortest
path to a leaf VN contains l CNs in T (cr ). Hence, |L0 | is
the magnitude of messages sent by leaf VNs, as well as the
magnitude of channel inputs. Then, we have
|Ll | =

Proof: Consider the minimum magnitude of all input
LLRs from the AWGNC as |L0 |, and follow the proof of
Theorem 1.
Theorem 1 and Corollary 2 can be easily extended to several
variations on min-sum decoding, such as attenuated min-sum
(AMS) decoding and offset min-sum (OMS) decoding [15],
as long as the attenuation factor and the offset factor are ﬁxed
constants.
Deﬁnition 4 (unsaturated decoder): An iterative MP decoder that does not impose any limitation on the magnitudes
of messages is called an unsaturated MP decoder.
For most LDPC codes, the trapping sets typically satisfy the
k-separation assumption only for small values of k. Nevertheless, as described more fully in Section IV, in computer simulations of unsaturated min-sum decoding applied to several
LDPC codes traditionally associated with high error ﬂoors, we
have not observed, in tens of billions of channel realizations
of both the BSC and the AWGNC, any decoding failure in
which the error patterns correspond to the support of a small
trapping set. Similar results were reported in [16], where no
error ﬂoors were observed when unsaturated BP decoding was
applied to selected LDPC codes on the AWGN channel.

|L0 | + (dv − 1)|Ll−1 |

> (dv − 1)l |L0 |

(3)

where dv is the variable node degree. Hence, it can be seen that
the magnitudes of messages sent towards the root CN cr of
the computation tree T (cr ) grow exponentially, with dv − 1 as
the base, in every upper VN level. Therefore, the magnitude
of the message sent from cr to its parent node vr , the kseparated root VN of Tk (vr ), in the l-th iteration is greater
than (dv − 1)l |L0 | for l ≤ k.
Now, let us consider the subtree, denoted by T (c ), formed
by branches in Tk (vr ) that start from a neighboring CN c ∈
CS \ C1 . It is not hard to see that there exists an integer t such
that any t-level subtree starting from a VN v ∈ S in T (c ),
i.e., a subtree with t levels of VNs, must have at least one
k-separated VN as its descendant. It is obvious that t ≤ a and
the value t depends on the structure of the trapping set. Note
that the leaf VNs of these t-level subtrees are not necessarily
the leaf VNs of Tk (vr ). Suppose the message received by
vr from its child c ∈ CS after l iterations, denoted by Ll ,
has a different sign than the message received from cr ∈ C1 ;
otherwise, vr would already be corrected. By considering each
such t-level subtree as a “supernode” with (dv − 1)t children,
we get the following upper bound
|Ll | < |L0 | (dv − 1)t − 1

l/t

.

III. N EW Q UANTIZATION RULE TO L OWER E RROR
F LOORS
As reported in the literature, most hardware implementations and their computer-based simulations use some form of
uniform quantization. We will refer to uniform quantizers with
quantization step ∆ and q-bit representation of quantization
levels, with one of the q bits denoting the sign. The quantized
values are l∆ for −N ≤ l ≤ N , where N = 2q−1 − 1.
As shown in the proof of Theorem 1 and Corollary 2, when
a trapping set satisﬁes the k-separation assumption for a large
value of k, the magnitudes of correct messages outside the
trapping set grow exponentially in the number of iterations.
Therefore, it would be desirable for the message quantizer
to capture, at least to some extent, the exponential increase
of these message magnitudes while retaining precision in the
representation of messages with smaller magnitudes. To this
end, we propose a new (q + 1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization
method that adds an additional bit to q-bit uniform quantization to indicate a change of step size in the representation of
large message magnitudes. Hence, the messages after quantization will belong to an alphabet of size 2q+1 −1. Speciﬁcally,
the (q + 1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization rule is given by

(4)

Therefore, we can see that, if l ≤ k is large enough and there
is no limitation imposed on the magnitude of messages, the
correct messages coming from outside of the trapping set to
VNs in V1 through their neighboring CNs in C1 will eventually
have greater magnitude than the sum of incorrect messages
from other neighboring CNs, and the decoder will ultimately
correct all VNs in the trapping set.
Corollary 2: Let G be the Tanner graph of a variableregular LDPC code that contains a subgraph S induced by a
trapping set. When S satisﬁes the k-separation assumption and
the channel messages from the AWGNC to all VNs outside S
are correct, the min-sum decoder can successfully correct all
erroneous VNs in S, provided k is large enough.


 (0, l), if l∆ − ∆ < L ≤ l∆ + ∆
2
2



 (0, N ), if N ∆ − ∆ < L < dN ∆

2



 (0, −N ), if −dN ∆ < L ≤ −N ∆ + ∆


2
Q(L) = (1, r), if dr N ∆ ≤ L < dr+1 N ∆


 (1, −r), if −dr+1 N ∆ < L ≤ −dr N ∆




 (1, N + 1), if L ≥ dN +1 N ∆




(1, −N − 1), if L ≤ −dN +1 N ∆

3

0

10

where N = 2q−1 − 1, −N + 1 ≤ l ≤ N − 1, 1 ≤ r ≤ N , and
d is a quantization parameter within the range (1, dv − 1].
Generally, the values represented by the (q + 1)-bit quasiuniform quantization message (0, l) are l∆, and the values
of message (1, ±r) are ±dr N ∆ respectively. For messages
within the range of [−N ∆, N ∆], the new quasi-uniform
quantizer provides the same precision as a q-bit uniform
quantizer with quantization step ∆. For messages outside that
range, non-uniform quantization with increasing step sizes of
the form dr N ∆ is used to allow reliable messages to be more
accurately represented.
Since the range of uniformly quantized messages in MP
decoders is small in practice, the correct messages outside
a trapping set could reach the saturation level within a few
iterations. As a result, even though correct, these messages
may not be large enough to offset the contribution of incorrect
incoming messages for problematic VNs. Hence, even after
optimization of the step and size of a uniform quantizer, the
decoder may not produce the same error ﬂoor performance as
an unsaturated min-sum decoder [9]. In contrast, the saturation
levels of the proposed (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantizer are
greatly extended, allowing the correct messages outside a
trapping set to grow large enough to overcome all incorrect
messages reaching the problematic VNs from other VNs
within the trapping set.
Although the motivation for the proposed quasi-uniform
quantization method came from an analysis of min-sum decoder behavior on variable-regular LDPC codes, the technique
can also be adapted to decoding of irregular LDPC codes
by suitably adjusting the parameter d. We have also found
that the proposed quasi-uniform quantization method works
well with most iterative message-passing decoding algorithms,
including the usual variants on min-sum decoding and various
approximations to the SPA. These results will be reported
elsewhere.

−1

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

Gallager−B
unsaturated min−sum
3−bit uniform min−sum
4−bit uniform min−sum
(3+1)−bit quasi−uniform

−6

10

−7

10

−8

10
0.01

0.02
0.03
Crossover Prob. p

0.04

0.05

0.06 0.07

Fig. 1. FER results for min-sum decoding of the (640,192) QC-LDPC code
on the BSC. (Uniform quantization step ∆ = 1, and (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform
quantization parameter d = 3.
0

10

−1

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10

−2

10

unsaturated AMS
3−bit uniform AMS
4−bit uniform AMS
(3+1)−bit quasi−uniform AMS

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−6

10

−7

10
0.02

0.03

0.04
0.05
0.06
Crossover Prob. p

0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1

Fig. 2. FER results for attenuated min-sum (AMS) decoding of the (640,192)
QC-LDPC code on the BSC. (Attenuation factor α = 0.5, uniform quantization step ∆ = 0.5, and (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization parameter
d = 2.

for saturated decoders, so it is quite easy to reach the error
ﬂoor with Monte Carlo simulation.
Figs. 1–4 show the simulation results for various types of
quantized min-sum decoders and unsaturated decoders. For the
BSC, we scaled the magnitudes of decoder input messages
from the channel to 1, since for linear decoders, such as
Gallager-B and the min-sum decoder, the scaling of channel
input messages does not affect the decoding performance. For
attenuated and offset min-sum decoding, we can compensate
for the scaling by adjusting the attenuation and the offset
factor, respectively. The step size ∆ of the uniform quantizer
and of the uniformly quantized range of the quasi-uniform
quantizer, is set to 1 in Fig. 1 and 0.5 in the rest. So, for example, when ∆ = 1, the 3-bit uniform quantizer produces values
{±3, ±2, ±1, 0}, and the (3+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantizer
yields values in {0, ±1, ±2, ±3, ±9, ±27, ±81, ±243} when
d = 3. In the simulation, the parameter d was heuristically
chosen, and when q is large, a small d would be enough to
represent a large range of magnitudes.
In Fig. 1, we see that the slope of the error ﬂoors resulting
from uniform quantization is close to that of the Gallager-B
decoder. This is because, when most messages saturate at the
same magnitude, min-sum decoding essentially degenerates

IV. N UMERICAL R ESULTS
To demonstrate the improved performance offered by our
proposed quasi-uniform quantization method, we compare its
error-rate performance to that of uniform quantization with
min-sum decoding applied to two known LDPC codes on the
BSC and the AWGNC. The two LDPC codes we evaluated
are a rate-0.3 (640,192) quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code [8] and
the rate-0.5 (2640,1320) Margulis LDPC code [2]. The frame
error rate (FER) curves are based on Monte Carlo simulations
that generated at least 200 error frames for each point in the
plots, and the maximum number of decoding iterations was
set to 200.
The (640,192) QC-LDPC code, designed by Han and
Ryan [8], is a variable-regular code with variable degree 5
and check degrees ranging from 5 to 9. It has 64 isomorphic
(5,5) trapping sets and 64 isomorphic (5,7) trapping sets. We
applied our exhaustive trapping set search algorithm [17] to
this code, and these are the only two types of (a, b) trapping
set for a ≤ 15 and b ≤ 7. The error ﬂoor starts relatively high

4

0

signiﬁcant factor contributing to the error ﬂoor phenomenon
in LDPC code performance. To address this problem, we
proposed a novel (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization method
that effectively extends the dynamic range of the quantizer.
Without modifying the CN and VN update rules or adding
extra stages to standard iterative decoding algorithms, the use
of this quantizer was shown to signiﬁcantly lower the error
ﬂoors of two well-studied LDPC codes when used with minsum decoding and its variants on the BSC and AWGNC.
Although not shown here, the results extend to other iterative
message-passing decoding algorithms.

10

−1

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−6

10

−7

10

−8

10

2

unsaturated OMS
4−bit uniform OMS
5−bit uniform OMS
(4+1)−bit quasi−uniform OMS
2.5

3

3.5
Eb/N0 (dB)

4

4.5

5

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Fig. 3. FER results for offset min-sum (OMS) decoding of the (640,192)
QC-LDPC code on the AWGNC. (Offset factor β = 0.5, uniform quantization
step ∆ = 0.5, and (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization parameter d = 3.

This work was supported in part by the Center for Magnetic
Recoding Research at the University of California, San Diego
and by the NSF under Grant CCF-0829865. The authors would
like to thank Brian Butler for helpful discussions.

0

10

−1

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10

R EFERENCES

−2

10

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comp.
Sci., vol. 74, 2003.
[3] T. Richardson, “Error-ﬂoors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. of the 41st
Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing,
Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–3, 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[4] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic,
“Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC
codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[5] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error ﬂoor
avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in
Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. on Pers., Indoor and Mobile Radio Comm., Berlin,
Germany, Sept. 2005, pp. 2386–2390.
[6] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikoli´ , V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright,
c
“Lowering LDPC error ﬂoors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Glob.
Telecom. Conf., Cannes, France, Dec. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[7] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief
propagation decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308–1317, Jul. 2007.
[8] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-ﬂoor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[9] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. Banihashemi, “On implementation of minsum algorithm and its modiﬁcations for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[10] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. Parhi, “On ﬁnite precision implementation
of LDPC codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, pp. 201–205, May 2001.
[11] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikoli´ , V. Anatharam, and M. J. Wainwright,
c
“Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance:
quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Treans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[12] Z. Zhang, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate
performance,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of California at Berkeley, 2009.
[13] B. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of
iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781,
Feb. 2001.
[14] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Multilevel
decoders surpassing belief propagation on the binary symmetric channel,”
in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Austin, TX, Jul. 2010, pp. 769–773.
[15] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X. Hu,
“Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, August 2005.
[16] B. Butler and P. Siegel, “Error ﬂoor approximation for LDPC codes in
the AWGN channel,”, in Proc. Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2011, pp. 204–211.
[17] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efﬁcient algorithms to ﬁnd all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom., Huston,
TX, Dec. 5–9, 2011.

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−6

10

−7

10

−8

10

1.5

unsaturated min−sum
5−bit uniform min−sum
6−bit uniform min−sum
(5+1)−bit quasi−uniform min−sum
2

Eb/N0 (dB)

2.5

3

Fig. 4. FER results of min-sum decoder on the Margulis code of length 2640
on AWGNC. Uniform quantization step ∆ = 0.5, and d = 1.2 in (q+1)-bit
quasi-uniform quantization.

to Gallager-B decoding, relying solely upon the signs of
messages. In comparison to the uniform quantizer with the
same number of bits, the proposed quasi-uniform quantization
method signiﬁcantly reduces the error ﬂoor and provides errorrate performance very close to that of an unsaturated decoder.
In all of the decoding failures observed when using the
quasi-uniform quantizer, no error pattern corresponded to the
support of a small trapping set. With uniform quantization,
on the other hand, almost all of the decoding failures corresponded to small trapping set supports when the crossover
probability of the BSC was small or the SNR of the AWGNC
was high. We also compared decoder performance on sequences in which every VN in a single (5,5) or (5,7) trapping
set of the (640,192) code was incorrect, with all other VNs set
to correct values. In all cases, the unsaturated min-sum decoder
and the min-sum decoder with the proposed quantization
method decoded successfully, while decoders with the uniform
quantizer failed. The same results were also obtained for the
(12,4) and (14,4) trapping sets in the Margulis code.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown that the use of uniform
quantization in iterative message-passing decoding can be a

5

