Title:          ISIT_paperV4.dvi
Creator:        dvips(k) 5.96dev Copyright 2007 Radical Eye Software
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Sat May 19 09:26:56 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:22 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      335528 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569567029

Information Theory for DNA Sequencing:
Part I: A Basic model
Abolfazl Motahari, Guy Bresler, and David Tse
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California at Berkeley
{motahari,gbresler,dtse}@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract—DNA sequencing is the basic workhorse of
modern day biology and medicine. Shotgun sequencing is the dominant technique used: many randomly
located short fragments called reads are extracted from
the DNA sequence, and these reads are assembled
to reconstruct the original sequence. By drawing an
analogy between the DNA sequencing problem and
the classic communication problem, we deﬁne an information theoretic notion of sequencing capacity. This
is the maximum number of DNA base pairs that can be
resolved reliably per read, and provides a fundamental
limit to the performance that can be achieved by
any assembly algorithm. We compute the sequencing
capacity explicitly for a simple statistical model of the
DNA sequence and the read process.

ACGTCCTATGCGTATGCGTAATGCCACATATTGCTATGGTAATCGCTGCATATC

genome length G ≈ 109

read length L ≈ 100

Fig. 1.

N reads
N ≈ 108

Schematic for shotgun sequencing.

When the human genome was sequenced in 2001, there
was only one sequencing technology, the Sanger platform.
Since 2005, there has been a proliferation of “next generation” platforms, including Roche/454, Life Technologies
SOLiD, Illumina Hi-Seq 2000 and Paciﬁc Biosciences RS.
Compared to the Sanger platform, these technologies can
provide massively parallel sequencing, producing far more
reads per instrument run and at a lower cost. Each of these
technologies generates reads of diﬀerent lengths and with
diﬀerent noise proﬁles. At the same time, there has been
a proliferation of a large number of assembly algorithms,
many tailored to speciﬁc sequencing technologies. (A recent article [1] surveys no less than 13 such algorithms.)
The design of these algorithms is based primarily on
computational considerations. The goal is to design eﬃcient algorithms that can scale well with the large amount
of sequencing data. Current algorithms are often tailored
to particular machines and are designed based on heuristics and domain knowledge regarding the speciﬁc DNA
being sequenced; this makes it diﬃcult even to compare
diﬀerent algorithms, not to mention to deﬁne what it
means by an “optimal” assembly algorithm for a given
sequencing problem.
An alternative to the computational view is the statistical view. In this view, the genome sequence is regarded
as a random string to be estimated based on the read
data. The basic question is: what is the minimum number
of reads needed to reconstruct the DNA sequence with
a given reliability? This minimum number can be used
as a benchmark to compare diﬀerent algorithms, and
an optimal algorithm is one that achieves this minimum
number. It can also provide an algorithm-independent
basis for comparing diﬀerent sequencing technologies and
for designing new technologies.

I. Introduction
DNA sequencing is the basic workhorse of modern
day biology and medicine. Since the sequencing of the
Human Reference Genome ten years ago, there has been
an explosive advance in sequencing technology, resulting
in several orders of magnitude increase in throughput and
decrease in cost. This advance allows the generation of
a massive amount of data, enabling the exploration of
a diverse set of questions in biology and medicine that
were beyond reach even several years ago. These questions include discovering genetic variations across diﬀerent
humans (such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms SNPs),
identifying genes aﬀected by mutation in cancer tissue
genomes, sequencing an individual’s genome for diagnosis
(personal genomics), and understanding DNA regulation
in diﬀerent body tissues.
Shotgun sequencing is the dominant method currently
used to sequence long strands of DNA, including entire
genomes. The basic shotgun DNA sequencing set-up is
shown in Figure 1. Starting with a DNA molecule, the
goal is to obtain the sequence of nucleotides (A, G, C or T )
comprising it. (For humans, the DNA sequence has about
3×109 nucleotides, or base pairs.) The sequencing machine
extracts a large number of reads from the DNA; each read
is a randomly located fragment of the DNA sequence, of
lengths of the order of 100-1000 base pairs, depending on
the sequencing technology. The number of reads can be of
the order of 10’s to 100’s of millions. The DNA assembly
problem is to reconstruct the DNA sequence from the many
reads.

1

information
sequence

genome
sequence

encoder

decoder

channel

physical
sequencing

assembly

sources and channels, there is a maximum rate of ﬂow
of information, measured by the number of information
source symbols per channel output, which can be conveyed
reliably through the channel. Third, he showed how this
maximum reliable rate can be explicitly computed in terms
of the statistics of the source and the statistics of the
channel.
The main goal of the present paper is to initiate a similar
program for the DNA sequencing problem. Shannon’s
main result assumes that one can optimize the encoder
and the decoder. For the DNA sequencing problem, the
encoder is ﬁxed and only the decoder (the assembly algorithm) can be optimized. Nevertheless, we show in this
paper that one can also deﬁne a maximum reliable rate of
ﬂow of information for the DNA sequencing problem. We
call this quantity the sequencing capacity C. It gives the
maximum number of DNA base pairs that can be resolved
per read, by any assembly algorithm, without regard
to computational limitations. Equivalently, the minimum
number of reads required to reconstruct a DNA sequence
of length G base pairs is G/C.
The sequencing capacity C depends on both the statistics of the DNA sequence as well as the speciﬁc physical
sequencing process. To make our ideas concrete, we compute C explicitly for a very simple model in this paper:
1) the DNA sequence is modeled as an i.i.d. random
process of length G with each symbol taking values
according to a probability distribution p on the
alphabet {A, G, C, T }.
2) each read is of length L symbols and begins at a
uniformly distributed location on the DNA sequence
and the locations are independent from one read to
another.
3) the read process is noiseless.
For this model, it turns out that the sequencing capacity
C depends on the read length L through a normalized
L
¯
parameter L := ln G as follows:

reconstructed
source sequence

reconstructed
genome sequence

sequence
of reads

Fig. 2.
(a) The general communication problem. (b) The DNA
sequencing problem viewed as a restricted communication problem.

This statistical view falls in the realm of DNA sequencing theory. A well-known lower bound on the number of
reads needed can be obtained by a coverage analysis, an
approach pioneered by Lander and Waterman [2]. This
lower bound is the number of reads such that with a
desired probability the randomly located reads cover the
entire genome sequence. While this is clearly a lower bound
on the minimum number of reads needed, it is in general
not tight: only requiring the reads to cover the entire
genome sequence does not guarantee that consecutive
reads can actually be stitched back together to recover
the entire sequence. The ability to do that depends on
other factors such as the statistical characteristics of the
DNA sequence and also the noise proﬁle in the read
process. Thus, characterizing the minimum number of
reads required for reconstruction is an open question in
general.
In this paper, we provide a new formulation and obtain new results to this question by drawing an analogy
between the DNA sequencing problem and the classical
communication problem. The basic communication problem is that of encoding an information source at one
point for transmission through a noisy channel to be
decoded at another point (Figure 2(a)). The problem is to
design a ”good” encoder and a ”good” decoder. The DNA
sequencing problem can be cast as a restricted case of the
communication problem (Figure 2(b)). The DNA sequence
of base pairs s1 , s2 , . . . , sG is the sequence of information
source symbols. The physical sequencing process is the
channel which generates from the DNA sequence a set
of reads r1 , r2 , . . . rN . Each read is viewed as a channel
output. The assembly algorithm is the decoder which tries
to reconstruct the original genome sequence from the
sequence of reads. The problem is to design a ”good”
assembly algorithm. Note that the only diﬀerence with the
general communication problem is that there is no explicit
encoder to optimize and the DNA sequence is sent directly
onto the channel.
Communication is an age-old ﬁeld and in its early days,
communication system designs were ad hoc and tailored
for speciﬁc sources and speciﬁc channels. In 1948, Claude
Shannon changed all this by introducing information
theory as a uniﬁed framework to study communication
problems [3]. He made several key contributions. First, he
explicitly modeled the source and the channel as random
processes. Second, he showed that for a wide class of

¯
Theorem 1. The capacity C(L) is given by
¯
C(L) =

0
¯
L

if
if

¯
L < 2/H2 (p),
¯
L > 2/H2 (p).

(1)

The result is summarized in Figure 3. Here H2 (p) is the
Renyi entropy of order-2, deﬁned to be
p2 .
i

H2 (p) := − ln

(2)

i

Since each read reveals L DNA base pairs, a naive
thought would be that the sequencing capacity C is simply
L base pairs/read. However, this is not correct since the
location of each read is unknown to the decoder. The larger
the length G of the DNA sequence, the more uncertainty
there is about the location of each read, and the less information each read provides. The result says that L/ ln G
is the eﬀective amount of information provided by a read,
provided that this number is larger than a threshold. If

2

R

¯
¯
C(L) = L

are denoted by capital boldface, such as S, X, Y. The
exception to these rules, for the sake of consistency with
the literature, are the (non-random) parameters G, N, and
L, and the constants R and C.

¯
L

II. Problem Formulation and Main Result
A. Formulation
A DNA sequence S = S1 S2 . . . SG is a long sequence of
nucleotides, or bases, with each base Si ∈ {A, C, T, G}.
For notational convenience we instead denote the bases
by numerals, i.e. Si ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. As discussed in the
introduction, in this paper each base Si is selected independently and identically according to the probability
distribution P(Si = j) = pj , with p = (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 ). We
assume that the DNA sequence is circular, i.e., Si = Sj if
i = j mod G; this simpliﬁes the exposition, and all results
apply with minor modiﬁcation to the non-circular case as
well.
The objective of DNA sequencing is to reconstruct
the whole sequence based on N reads drawn randomly
from the sequence. A read is a substring of length L
from the DNA sequence. The set of reads is denoted by
R = {R1 , R2 , . . . , RN }. The starting location of read i is
Ti , so Ri = S[Ti , Ti + L − 1]. The set of starting locations
of the reads is denoted T = {T1 , T2 , . . . , TN }. In this paper
each read starting location T1 , . . . , TN is selected uniformly
and independently from the DNA sequence.
An assembly algorithm is a map taking a set of N
reads R = {R1 , . . . , RN } and returning an estimated
ˆ
ˆ
sequence S = S(R). We require perfect reconstruction,
which presumes that the algorithm φ makes an error if
ˆ
S = S. We let P denote the probability model for the
(random) DNA sequence S and the sample locations T ,
ˆ
and E := {S = S} the error event. A question of central
interest is: what is the minimum number of reads N such
that the reconstruction error probability is less than a
given target ǫ, and what is the optimal assembly algorithm
that can achieve such performance? Unfortunately, this is
in general a diﬃcult question to answer.
Taking a cue from information theory, we instead ask an
easier asymptotic question: what is the largest information
rate R := G/N achievable such that P(E) → 0 as
N, G → ∞, and which algorithm achieves the optimal rate
asymptotically? More precisely, a rate R base pair/read is
said to be achievable if there exists an assembly algorithm
such that P(E) → 0 as N, G → ∞ with G/N ﬁxed to
be R. The capacity C is deﬁned as the supremum of all
achievable rates. Given a probability model for S and the
sample locations T , we would like to compute C.
This general deﬁnition of capacity is in the limit of large
G, the length of the DNA sequence. However, we were not
explicit about how the read length L scales. For the i.i.d.
noiseless model it turns out, for reasons that will become
clear, that the natural scaling is to also let L → ∞ but
¯
ﬁxing the ratio L = L/ ln G deﬁned earlier.

2
H2 (p)

2
H2 (p)

Fig. 3. The sequencing capacity C as a function of the normalized
¯
read length L.

L/ ln G is below the threshold, reconstruction is impossible
no matter how many reads are provided to the assembly
algorithm. The threshold value 2/H2 (p) depends on the
statistics of the source.
¯
The condition L > 2/H2 (p) can be interpreted as the
condition for no duplication of length L subsequences in
the length G DNA sequence. Arratia et al [4] showed that
this is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for reconstruction of the i.i.d. DNA sequence if all length L subsequences
of the DNA sequence are given as reads. This arises in a
setup called sequencing by hybridization. What our result
says is that, for shotgun sequencing where the reads are
randomly sampled, if in addition to this no-duplication
condition, it also holds that the sequencing rate G/N
¯
is less than L, then reconstruction is possible. We will
see that this second condition is precisely the coverage
condition of Lander-Waterman. Hence, what our result
says is that no-duplication and coverage are suﬃcient for
reconstruction.
Li [5] has also posed the question of minimum number
of reads for the i.i.d. equiprobable DNA sequence model.
He showed that if L > 4 log2 G, then the number of
reads needed is O(G log2 G/L). Specializing our result to
this case, our capacity result shows that reconstruction
is possible if and only if L > log2 G and the number of
reads is G ln G/L. Not only our result is necessary and
suﬃcient, we have a much weaker condition on the read
length L and we get the right pre-constant on the number
of reads needed, not only how it scales with G and L.
Due to a lack of space, the proofs of the results can be
found in the full paper [6]. Also, various extensions of the
basic result are explored in the full paper, including the
case when the reads are noisy.
A brief remark on notation is in order. Sets (and
probabilistic events) are denoted by calligraphic type, e.g.
A, B, E, vectors by boldface, e.g. s, x, y, and random variables by capital letters such as S, X, Y . Random vectors

3

Theorem 1 ﬁnds the capacity for the i.i.d. noiseless
sequencing model. The proof of this Theorem is sketched
in the next two subsections, with the details relegated
to [6]. Section II-B explains why the expression (1) is a
natural upper bound to the capacity, while section II-C
gives a simple assembly algorithm which can achieve the
upper bound.

x

y

Fig. 4. Two pairs of interleaved duplications create ambiguity: from
the reads it is impossible to know whether the sequences x and y are
as shown, or swapped.

[4] carried out a thorough analysis of randomly occurring
duplications for the same i.i.d. sequence model as ours,
and showed that the second pattern of two iterleaved
duplications is the typical event for reconstruction to fail.
A consequence of Theorem 7 in [4] is the following lemma,
see also [8].

B. Upper Bound
In this section we derive an upper bound on the capacity
for the i.i.d. sequence model; such a bound holds for any
algorithm, even one possessing unbounded computational
power. The bound is made up of two necessary conditions.
First, reconstruction of the DNA sequence is clearly impossible if it is not covered by the reads. Second, reconstruction is not possible if there are excessively long duplicated
portions of the genome. Loosely, such duplications (which
arise due to the random nature of the DNA source) create
confusion if they are longer than the read length.
a) Coverage.: In order to reconstruct the DNA sequence it is necessary to observe each of the nucleotides,
i.e. the reads must cover the sequence. Worse than the
missing nucleotides, a gap in coverage also creates ambiguity in the order of the contiguous pieces. The paper of
Lander and Waterman [2] studied the coverage problem in
the context of DNA sequencing.

¯
Lemma 3 (Duplication-limited). If L < H22 , then a
(p)
random DNA sequence contains two pairs of interleaved
¯
duplications with probability 1 − o(1) and hence C(L) = 0.
Following Arratia et al. [4], the ﬁrst-order back-of-theenvelope calculation to understand this result is how many
duplications of length L are expected to arise. If there
are two pairs of interleaved duplications, then there must
be some duplications in the ﬁrst place; and conversely, if
there are several pairs of duplications, it is plausible that
with a reasonably high probability they will be interleaved.
Denoting by SL the length-L subsequence starting at
i
position i, we have

Lemma 2 (Coverage-limited). Suppose the information
G
¯
rate is R = N ≥ L. Then the sequence is not covered by
the reads with probability 1 − o(1). On the other hand, if
¯
R < L, the sequence is covered by the reads with probability
1 − o(1).

P(SL = SL ) .
i
j

E[# of length L duplications] =
1≤i<j≤G

(3)
Now, the probability that two speciﬁc physically disjoint
length-L subsequences are identical is:

¯
¯
The ﬁrst statement of the lemma implies that C(L) ≤ L.
A standard coupon collector-style argument proves this
lemma. A back-of-the-evelope justiﬁcation, which will be
useful in the sequel, is as follows. To a very good approximation, the starting locations of the reads are given according to a Poisson process with rate λ = N/G, and thus
each spacing has an exponential(λ) distribution. Hence,
the probability that there is a gap between two successive
reads is approximately e−λL . Hence, the expected number
of gaps is approximately N e−Lλ . This quantity is bounded
¯
away from zero if R ≥ L, and approaches zero otherwise.
Note that coverage depends on the read locations but is
independent of the DNA sequence itself; the next condition
depends only on the sequence.
b) Duplication: The random nature of the DNA sequence gives rise to a variety of patterns. The key observation in [7] is that there exist two patterns in the DNA
sequence precluding reconstruction from an arbitrary set
of reads of length L. In other words, reconstruction is not
possible even if the L-spectrum, i.e. the set of all substrings
of length L appearing in the DNA sequence, is given. The
ﬁrst pattern is the three way duplication of a substring of
length L − 1. The second pattern is two interleaved pairs
of duplications of length L − 1, see Figure 4. Arratia et al.

p2
i

ℓ

= e−ℓH2 (p) ,

i
2
where H2 (p) = − log
is the R´nyi entropy of
e
i pi
order two. Ignoring the GL terms in (3) where SL and
i
SL overlap, we get the lower bound:
j

G2
G2 −LH2 (p)
−GL e−LH2 (p) ≈
e
.
2
2
(4)
¯
This number approaches inﬁnity if L = L/ ln G is less
than 2/H2 (p), suggesting that under this condition, the
probability of having two pairs of interleaved duplications
is very high. Moreover, as is proved in [6] that the contribution of the terms in (3) due to physically overlapping
subsequences is not large, and so the lower bound in (4)
¯
is essentially tight. This suggests that L = 2/H2 (p) is in
fact the threshold for existence of interleaved duplications.
Note that for any ﬁxed read length L, the probability
of such a duplication event will approach 1 as the DNA
length G → ∞. This means that if we had deﬁned capacity
for a ﬁxed read length L, then for any value of L, the
capacity would have been zero. Thus, to get a meaningful
capacity result, one must scale L with G, and Lemma
¯
3 suggests that letting L and G grow while ﬁxing L

E[# of duplications] >

4

This number is largest either when ℓ = L or ℓ = 0.
This suggests that, typically, errors occurs in stage L
or stage 0 of the algorithm. Errors occur at stage L if
there are duplications of length L substrings in the DNA
sequence. Errors occur at stage 0 if there are still leftover
unmerged contigs. The no-duplication condition ensures
that the probability of the former event is small. The
coverage condition ensures that the probability of the
latter event is small. Thus, the two necessary conditions
are also suﬃcient for reconstruction.
It should be noted that the greedy algorithm has also
been shown to be optimal for the shortest common superstring problem under certain probabilistic settings [9].
The shortest common superstring problem is the problem
of ﬁnding the shortest string containing a set of given
strings. However, in their model, the given strings are
all independently distributed and does not from a single
”mother” sequence. In contrast, in our model, even though
the original DNA sequence is assumed to be i.i.d., the
reads will be highly correlated, since many of the reads
will be physically overlapping. In fact, it follows from [9]
that, given N reads and the read length L scales like ln N ,
the length of the shortest common superstring scales like
N ln N . On the other hand, in our model, the length of
the reconstructed sequence would be proportional to N .
Hence, the length of the shortest common superstring is
much longer, a consequence of the fact that the reads are
all independent and therefore much harder to merge. So
the two problems are totally diﬀerent, although coincidentally the greedy algorithm is optimal for both problems.
Acknowledgements: This work is supported by the
NSERC of Canada and by the NSF Center for Science
of Information under grant agreement CCF-0939370.

is the correct scaling. This is further validated by the
achievability result in the next section.
C. Optimal Algorithm
A simple greedy algorithm (perhaps surprisingly) turns
out to be optimal, achieving the capacity described in
Theorem 1. Essentially, the greedy algorithm merges the
reads repeatedly into contigs1 repeatedly and greedily
based on an overlap score between any two strings. The
algorithm is given as follows.
Greedy Algorithm
Input: R, the set of reads of length L.
1) Initialize the set of contigs as the given reads.
2) Find two contigs with largest overlap score, breaking
ties arbitrarily, and merge them into one contig.
3) Repeat Step 2 until only one contig remains.
In this paper the overlap score W (S1 , S2 ) is deﬁned as the
maximum length suﬃx of S1 identical to a preﬁx of S2 .
Theorem 4 (Achievable rate). The greedy algorithm with
¯
¯
overlap score W can achieve any rate R < L if L >
2/H2 (p), thus achieving capacity.
Basically, this result says that if the reads cover the
DNA sequence and there are no duplications of length
L, then the greedy algorithm can reconstruct the DNA
sequence. Let us give a back-of-the-envelope calculation
to understand this result. The detailed proof will be given
in [6].
Since the greedy algorithm merges reads according to
overlap score, we may think of the algorithm as working
in stages, starting with an overlap score of L down to
an overlap score of 0. At stage ℓ, the merging is between
contigs with overlap score ℓ. The key is to ﬁnd the typical
stage at which errors in merging ﬁrst occurs. Assuming no
errors have occurred in stages L, L − 1, . . . , ℓ + 1. Consider
the situation in stage ℓ. The algorithm has already merged
the reads into a number of contigs. The boundary between
two neighboring contigs is where the overlap between the
neighboring reads is less than or equal to ℓ; if it were
larger than ℓ, the two contigs would have been merged
already. Hence, the expected number of contigs at stage ℓ
is the expected number of pairs of successive reads with
spacing greater than L − ℓ. Again invoking the Poisson
approximation, this is roughly equal to

References
[1] J. Miller, S. Koren, and G. Sutton, “Assembly algorithms for
next-generation sequencing data,” Genomics, vol. 95, pp. 315–
327, 2010.
[2] E. S. Lander and M. S. Waterman, “Genomic mapping by ﬁngerprinting random clones: A mathematical analysis,” Genomics,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 231–239, 1988.
[3] C. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell
System Technical Journal, vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[4] R. Arratia, D. Martin, G. Reinert, and M. S. Waterman, “Poisson
process approximation for sequence repeats, and sequencing by
hybridization,” J. of Comp. Bio., vol. 3, pp. 425–463, 1996.
[5] M. Li, “Towards a DNA sequencing theory (learning a string),”
in Foundations of Computer Science, vol. 1, Oct 1990, pp. 125
–134.
[6] S. Motahari, G. Bresler, and D. Tse, “Information theory of DNA
sequencing,” 2012, http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.6233.
[7] E. Ukkonen, “Approximate string matching with q-grams and
maximal matches,” Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 92, no. 1,
pp. 191–211, 1992.
[8] M. Dyer, A. Frieze, and S. Suen, “The probability of unique solutions of sequencing by hybridization,” Journal of Computational
Biology, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 105–110, 1994.
[9] A. Frieze and W. Szpankowski, “Greedy algorithms for the
shortest common superstring that are asymptotically optimal,”
Algorithmica, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 21–36, 1998.

N e−λ(L−ℓ) ,
where λ = N/G = 1/R.
Two contigs will be merged in error in stage ℓ if the
length ℓ suﬃx of one contig equals the length ℓ preﬁx of
another contig. Assuming these substrings are physically
disjoint, the probability of this event is e−ℓH2 (p) . Hence,
the expected number of pairs of contigs for which this
confusion event happens is approximately
N e−λ(L−ℓ)
1 Here,

2

· e−ℓH2 (p) .

(5)

a contig means a contiguous, overlapping sequenced reads.

5

