Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Sun May 13 00:14:26 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:26 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      552053 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569565495

Wireless Downloading Delay under Proportional Fair Scheduling with
Coupled Service and Requests: An Approximated Analysis
Karthikeyan Shanmugam

Giuseppe Caire

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089

characterized by relatively rare requests of very large blocks
of data (tens to hundreds of MBs). Furthermore, while downloading a video ﬁle, a user does not start the download of
a new one until the current request is satisﬁed. In order to
mimic the typical behavior of mobile video users (think of a
group of people watching YouTube videos), in this paper we
assume that users have two states: idle or active. Idle users
may make requests of data ﬁles independently with a certain
probability p on each scheduling slot. If an idle user k makes
a request at slot tk , it becomes active on slot tk + 1. The BS
serves the active users with the PFS policy. Active users stay
active until their requested ﬁles are completely downloaded,
and cannot generate more requests while in the active state.
With this model, the rate of the users requests depends on
their downloading delay: users with large download delay will
generate less frequent requests than users with small download
delay. In turn, the download delay depends on the geometry
of the system (users distances from the BS), given that the
allocation of active users on the time-frequency slots is made
according to PFS.
The main contribution of this paper consists of an approximate analysis of the mean ﬁle downloading delay of PFS
under the above model of coupled service and requests, for
time-frequency block-fading (modeling the OFDM channel)
and distance-dependent path loss, and using the log(1 + snr)
instantaneous rate function. Our analysis yields an approximation of the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the
mean downloading delay over the users’ population, for a ﬁxed
snapshot of the users’ positions in the cell.

Abstract—We propose a method for approximating the downloading delay for the downlink of a cellular system reminiscent of
LTE (based on OFDMA), where users are randomly distributed
in a cell, and the channel gain is formed by a distance dependent
component (path loss), constant in time and frequency, and
a time-frequency selective small-scale fading component, i.i.d.
across the OFDMA resource allocation blocks. The proposed
method yields an approximation of the user downloading delay
cdf, through the solution of a system of ﬁxed-point equations. It
provides accurate results when the trafﬁc demand is large.1

I. I NTRODUCTION
The latest 3GPP standards (LTE), make use of OFDMA
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access) and schedule the users on the time-frequency resource allocation blocks
according to Proportional Fairness Scheduling (PFS) [1]. Analyzing PFS under a realistic system model is important to
understand user level performance of such systems. Recent
research effort has been largely directed towards obtaining approximate throughput closed form expressions and asymptotic
properties characterization of PFS in a block-fading broadcast
channel (downlink) in the inﬁnite backlog case [2]–[6], i.e.,
when the base station (BS) has an inﬁnite repository of data
to send to each of the K users in the cell. To our knowledge,
closed form solutions for the throughput has not been found
except for the case of where the user rate is R(snr) = αsnr
(linear rate model). In [5], [6] an approximate closed form
expression for the user throughput for the inﬁnite backlog case
with rates obeying Shannon rate formula R(snr) = log(1+snr)
is provided. A different approach is taken in [7], focusing
on the case of random users’ requests. In [7] it is assumed
that users belong to distance classes (set of users at a speciﬁc
distance from the base station) and generate trafﬁc according
to Poisson arrival processes. Under the linear rate assumption,
closed form expressions are obtained for the mean ﬁle transfer
delay using analysis of the multiclass processor sharing model
[8]. The log factor in the Shannon rate formula presents
a difﬁculty of extending the multiclass processor sharing
approach.
The trafﬁc pattern in today’s cellular systems have also
changed with respect to the traditional models of Poisson
arrivals (data) or constant ﬁxed rate (voice). Mobile video
is expected to play a more and more signiﬁcant role in the
overall cellular downlink trafﬁc [9]. This type of trafﬁc is

II. S YSTEM MODEL
We consider a circular cell with the BS located at the
center, corresponding to origin of the coordinate system. The
2
cell contains K users, at ﬁxed positions uk ∈ R . The
wireless communication channel between the BS and any
user is modeled as a Gaussian AWGN channel with time and
frequency selective fading. The channel coefﬁcients are given
as the product of two components: a frequency-ﬂat component
g(uk ) that depends only on the distance rk = uk between
the BS and the user (path loss), and a Rayleigh small-scale
fading component Hk,0 (t, f ) ∼ CN (0, 1), i.i.d. with respect
to the user index k, the time-slot index t and the OFDM
subcarrier index f .
We assume OFDM TDMA signaling closely inspired by
LTE release 8 [1], and make the common and realistic assump-

1 This work has been partially funded by Intel, through the VAWN (videoaware wireless networks) project.

1

III. S CHEDULING POLICIES

tion that the time and frequency selective small-scale fading is
frequency-ﬂat on Nf OFDM subcarriers (spanning the channel
coherence bandwidth) and remains constant in time (spanning
the coherence time) over a physical layer scheduling frame
formed by a block of Nt OFDM symbols. The smallest possible resource allocation block consists of a tile of T = Nf ×Nt
OFDM symbols in the time-frequency plane. We indicate by
F the number of such resource allocation blocks available at
any scheduling slot. The delay is expressed as the number of
scheduling slots (consisting of Nt OFDM symbols along time)
between the slot when a request is made, and the slot when
the ﬁle is completely downloaded.
The received signal at user k, located at uk , over timefrequency resource allocation block (t, f ), with t = 0, 1, 2, . . .
and f ∈ {1, . . . , F }, is given by
yk (t, f ) =

g(uk , 0)Hk,0 (t, f )x0 (t, f ) + zk (t, f ),
T

We review here the widely used PFS policy, which schedules the users such that they operate at the PFS point of the
system ergodic rate region, deﬁned as the solution of the
convex optimization problem:
K

maximize
subject to

(1)

1
¯
Rk = lim
t→∞ tT

(2)

t

Bk (t),
τ =1

F

Qk(t,f ) (t)Rk(t,f ) (t, f ),

and let Bk (t) denote the corresponding number of downloaded
bits (see (3)).
Virtual queues weight update: The weights Qk (t) are
updated according to:
Qk (t + 1) = max{Qk (t) − Bk (t), 0} + Ak (t)

(7)

where the virtual arrival vector (A1 (t), . . . , AK (t)) is a solution to:
K

maximize V U (a) −

Qk (t)ak
k=1

subject to

0 ≤ ak ≤ Amax

(8)

Following [13], we approximate PFS by the more tractable
genie-aided scheduling policy referred to here as BFS and
deﬁned as follows:
Best Fade Scheduling: At each slot time t, for each
frequency slot f , choose the user k(t, f ) that maximizes

(3)

The delay of user k, conditioned by the event that user k makes
a request at time tk , is given by the conditional stopping time:

k(t, f ) = arg max

n

Bk (tk + t) ≥ B

(6)

f =1

f ∈Fk (t)

Dk (tk ) = min n = 1, 2, . . . , s.t.

(5)

¯
¯
¯
satisfy U (R) ≥ U (Rk ) − O(1/V ), where R is the solution
¯ ∈ [0, Amax ]K and where V and Amax
of (5), provided that R
are algorithm control parameters.
Maxweight scheduling: Let k(t, f ) denote the allocation of
users to the resource blocks (t, f ) maximizing the weighted
rate sum

With reference to the coupled requests model described
in Section I, we have that users stay in the idle state for a
random number of slots, geometrically distributed with mean
¯
value Tidle = 1/p. Let Kon (t) denote the set of active users
at time t. Let |Kon (t)| = Kon (t). At each slot time, active
users are scheduled by the BS on the F resource blocks made
of T OFDM symbols. A downlink scheduling policy under
OFDMA is a rule that allocates, at each time t, the F available
blocks to the Kon (t) active users. When a user completes
its ﬁle download and becomes idle, it is eliminated from the
scheduling policy. Instead, when a user transits from the idle
to the active state, it is included in the scheduling policy.
Let Fk (t) denote the set of resource allocation blocks given
to user k at time t according to some scheduling policy.
Then, the aggregate instantaneous number of downloaded
information bits for user k at time t is given by
Rk (t, f ).

¯
R∈R

where R is the ergodic rate region of the OFDMA system
¯
¯
¯
deﬁned above, and R = (R1 , . . . , RK ) denotes the vector of
long-term average (i.e., ergodic) user rates.
In a system without user dynamics (i.e., where all Kon = K
users are active and have inﬁnite backlog), the Lyapunov drift
analysis ( [11], [12]) under the stochastic network optimization
framework proves that the policy described below, which uses
virtual queues and maxweight scheduling, yields instantaneous
rates Bk (t)/T such that the achieved long-term average rates,

T

Bk (t) = T

¯
log(Rk )
k=1

where x0 (t, f ) ∈ C , yk (t, f ) ∈ C and zk (t, f ) ∈
CT denote the transmit and receive signal vectors and the
noise vector, with zk (t, f ) ∼ CN (0, I), independent across
time and frequency. We normalize the transmit power as
1
H
T tr(E[x0 (t, f )x0 (t, f )]) = 1, yielding the SNR at the receiver
(averaged over the small-scale fading) equal to g(uk , 0). The
rate supported by user k on block (t, f ) is given by the
Shannon capacity formula:
Rk (t, f ) = log 1 + g(uk , 0)|Hk,0 (t, f )|2 .

¯
U (R) =

k=1,...,K

.

|Hk (t, f )|2

(9)

Notice that BFS is genie-aided since its assumes that the BS
knows the small-scale fading coefﬁcients magnitudes, while
in practice any user is able only to measure and feed back its
instantaneous receiver SNR given by g(uk , 0)|Hk (t, f )|2 , i.e.,
it is not able to distinguish between the contribution of the path

t=1

(4)
where, for simplicity, all requested ﬁles are assumed to have
the same size equal to B bits (our analysis can be extended
to arbitrary ﬁle size distributions with ﬁnite mean [10]).

2

loss and that of the (normalized) Rayleigh fading component.
When the coefﬁcients |Hk (t, f )|2 are i.i.d. across users, time
and frequency, as in our system model, it follows that each user
is given on average the same number of dimensions per slot,
as in round-robin scheduling. However, BFS is able to recover
the multiuser diversity gain since, on each subcarrier f , the
user with the largest fading coefﬁcient is scheduled at each
slot t. BFS is known to closely approximate the performance
of PFS when the number of users K is large.
In our system, both PFS and BFS are applied to the set of
active users Kon (t) only, i.e., the maxweight user selection
(6) or best fade user selection (9) are restricted to Kon (t). In
this work, we shall use BFS as a proxy for PFS, since it is
known that the performance of BFS is close to that of PFS
when Kon (t) is large [13].
Remark. PFS is more commonly implemented as described
in [2], where users are selected such that the ratio of instantaneous rate over their long-term average is maximized. It has
been shown that this alternative approach achieves the PFS
point in the ergodic rate region (deﬁned by (5)).
♦

that the duration of the active times corresponds exactly to the
delay deﬁned in (4).
The rate experienced by an active user is given by:
Rk (t, f )

=

log 1 + g(uk , 0)|Hk,0 (t, f )|2
×1 k = arg

max

k ∈Kon (t)

|Hk ,0 (t, f )|2 (11)

Since the random variables maxk =1,...,K |Hk ,0 (t, f )|2
are i.i.d. with respect to the indices (t, f ), we indicate by χK a random variable identically distributed as
maxk =1,...,K |Hk ,0 (t, f )|2 , for any (t, f ).
Consider an active user k. We have,
B
¯
(12)
Dk ≈ ¯ ,
Bk
¯
¯
where the mean downloading delay is denoted by Dk and Bk
indicates the average number of transmitted bits when user k
is active. The detailed derivation of approximation (12), and
of (14) and (15) are omitted due to space limitations, and are
provided in [10].
For analysis purposes, we assume that users are grouped
into L distance classes, such that cluster has size K and
users in cluster have the same distance from the BS, i.e.,
they have the same path loss, denoted by g . The system is
completely symmetric with respect to two users in the same
¯
distance class. We denote by D , the mean delay of a user in
class . The overall “User Delay CDF” is given by the staircase
function

IV. A PPROXIMATE DELAY ANALYSIS
We provide an approximated analysis technique for the
downloading delay cdf under the BFS policy deﬁned before.
Rounding Bk (t) to integers, the system evolves according
to a Markov Chain (MC) with state given by S(t) =
(S1 (t), . . . , SK (t)), where Sk (t) is the number of bits yet to be
transmitted at slot time t in the transmit queue of user k. The
state space is ﬁnite, and given by the integer K-dimensional
grid S = {0, 1, . . . , B}K . The MC is indecomposable and
non-periodic and therefore is ergodic with a well-deﬁned
stationary distribution. Let Sk denote all states with the k-th
component equal to zero, i.e., in which user k is idle. Then, the
download delay of user k can be deﬁned as the time between
two successive visits to the set Sk .
Since B and K are large (in practice, we are interested in
cells with hundreds of users and ﬁles sizes of tens of MBs),
determining the MC stationary distribution and, consequently,
the delay distribution is essentially infeasible. However, we
note that for BFS, under inﬁnite backlog, determining the
average throughput is very simple [13]. Here, the difﬁculty
is introduced by the fact that users are dynamically active or
idle depending on their requests and their service times are
mutually dependent.
In order to make progress, we resort to some approximation.
Assuming that the system evolves according to the MC deﬁned
before, we notice that the probability that user k is active is
given by
pon (k) = lim E[1{Sk (t) > 0}],
(10)

L

FD (d|g1 , . . . , gL ) =
=1

K
¯
1{d ≤ D }
K

(13)

Hence, the problem reduces to determining a good approxi¯
mation of the mean delay D for the users in class , for a
given set of path losses {g1 , . . . , gL }. This formulation is valid
even without clustering, taking into account individual users at
different distances. However, distance quantization into classes
¯
is useful in order to limit the number of values D to be
determined.
Again by stationarity and ergodicity, we have that for a
given user k in class
¯
D
pon ( ) = ¯
(14)
D + 1/p
Then, under the BFS policy, for a user k in class
¯
B k =E

we have

TF
E log (1 + g χKon )
Kon (t)

Kon = Kon (t) Sk (t) > 0 .

(15)

Let

t→∞

¯
R (Kon (t)) = E log (1 + g χKon ) Kon = Kon (t)

where the left-hand side of (10) is calculated with respect to
the MC stationary distribution and where 1{A} is the indicator
for event A. All users have the same geometric distribution of
idle times, but their active times are distributed in a different
way due to the fact that users have different path losses. Notice

denote the inner conditional expectation. Given Kon (t), this
is easily computed in closed form in terms of the Ei(x) =
x

−∞

3

et
t dt

exponential integral function (details are omitted here

¯
and can be found in [10]). Then, computing Bk reduces to
evaluating the outer expectation with respect to the random
variable Kon (t), conditionally on {Sk (t) > 0} (i.e., user k
active).
Characterizing the stationary conditional distribution of
Kon (t) given {Sk (t) > 0}, appears to be very difﬁcult if
not impossible. However, when K is large, B is large and
p is not too small, we may assume that Kon (t) has little
ﬂuctuations around its mean, corresponding to transitions of
individual users between the active and the idle state, and that
the dependency on a particular user k being active is mild.
Therefore, we resort to the following two options:
1) Binomial Approximation: We ignore the dependence
between the event {Sk (t) > 0} and the other users
activity and let Kon (t) be conditionally distributed given

˜
where K =

Through simulations with different request probability p,
we compare the average download delays experienced by the
users under the BFS policy (simulation), the actual PFS policy
(simulation), and the proposed approximated analysis obtained
from the system of ﬁxed-point equations with binomial and
Poisson approximations developed in this work. The plots
f
labeled ’File Delay’ on the Y −axis show FDl (·) while the
plots with label ’User Delay’ show FD (·).
The OFDM parameters used in the simulations are inspired
by 3GPP LTE release 8 [1] and are give in Table I. The
cell radius is 400m and the number of users in the cell
is 300. For the actual system simulations, the users are
randomly uniformly distributed in the cell. Therefore, the
distance quantization corresponding to the L classes is made
for simplifying the computation of the ﬁxed point equations
solution, and introduces another source of approximation. The
coherence time is equal to 0.1s reﬂecting a low mobility
scenario. Simulations are done for demand probability p=
0.0001, 0.0002, 0.00027, 0.0003 and 0.0004 corresponding to
average idle times of approximately 17, 8, 6, 5 and 4 minutes
respectively. The ﬁle size is B = 30 MB (a typical YouTube
short video which lasts about 4 min). The simulations of the
actual systems are performed over 150000 slots. Implementation of the approximation assumes L = 20 clusters with cluster
distances r equally spaced from 20m to 400m with 20m
increments. Then the number of users in class is calculated
by counting users from the actual random position generation
falling in the corresponding annular region between r and
r −1 .
Plots of “File Delay CDF” for demand probabilities 0.0004
and 0.0001/slot are shown in Fig. (1a-1b). A plot for “User
delay CDF” for the demand probability 0.00027/slot is shown
in Fig. (1c). Plots for other cases have not been included due to
space constraints but are available in [10]. Except in the case
of very low trafﬁc (p = 0.0001), the proposed approximation,
the BFS simulation and the PFS simulation yield very similar
results. For the low trafﬁc case, PFS deviates from BFS and
the approximation is not good for both scheduling policies.
We ﬁnd that binomial and Poisson approximations essentially
coincide. In the ﬁxed point iteration (given by (16)), the
approximate way of calculating the conditional distribution of
Kon (t) given {Sk (t) > 0} by decoupling all active users or
by Poisson approximation appears to be valid only when the
number of active users is large, since in this regime any user
is like a “drop in the ocean” and the system approximately
decouples, i.e., the active states of different users have a weak
statistical dependence between them.

Xi (pon (i)), where

the Xi (q)’s denote independent Bernoulli variables with
2) Poisson Approximation: We use the known fact that
the sum of mildly dependent Bernoulli variables can be
approximated by a Poisson random variable (Stein-Chen
approximation [14]) and let Kon (t) be conditionally
K

pon (i)),

i=1,i=k

where Poi(λ) represents a Poisson random variable with
mean λ.
Combining (15), (12) and the binomial approximation, we
obtain the following system of ﬁxed point equations in the
¯
variables D :
B
TFE

R (Kon, )
Kon,
L

K

Kon, =1 +

Xi
=1, = i=1

K −1

+

Xi
i=1

¯
D
¯ + 1/p
D

¯
D
¯ + 1/p
D

(16)

The second equation, above, is changed appropriately if the
Poisson approximation is used in place of the binomial approximation. During numerical evaluation, the ﬁxed point is
initialized with delay D = 1000 slots for all (approximately
corresponds to the case when downloaded bits per slot is
calculated assuming spectral efﬁciency of 2 bits/symbol at the
BS).
It is also possible to obtain an approximate delay cdf for
the individual ﬁles requested in stationary conditions. The
arrival rate of requests for user belonging to distance class
1
is D +1/p . Therefore the fraction of ﬁles with average delay
¯
1
¯
D is K D +1/p . The “File Delay CDF” is given by:
K ¯
L
f
FDl (d|g1 , . . . , gL ) =
=1

1
K
¯
¯ + 1/p 1{d ≤ D }
˜
K D

trafﬁc offered). Notice that

V. S IMULATIONS AND COMPARISONS

P(Xi (q) = 1) = q.

¯
D =

1
(total
¯
D +1/p

with our model we have that users enjoying a lower downloading delay make more requests per unit time than users
with larger downloading delays. This feature distinguishes our
model that differs from the independent Poisson arrivals.

i=1,i=k

distributed given {Sk (t) > 0} as 1+Poi(

K
=1

K

{Sk (t) > 0} as the sum 1 +

L

(17)

4

TABLE I: Simulation parameters based on LTE speciﬁcations.
Parameter of the System
Parameter Nf
Parameter Nt
Resource allocation block
Frequency blocks for allocation
Pathloss function (g(u, 0)
in dB, r = |u| in m)

VI. D ISCUSSION

Value Assigned
12 Sub-carriers = 180KHz
1400 OFDM symbs (corresponds to
0.1s coherence time)
T = Nt ×Nf = 16800 OFDM symbs.
100

There are several sources of approximation in our analysis:
replacing PFS with BFS, quantizing distances, and neglecting
the (weak) statistical dependence between users activity. Nevertheless, in the regime of high trafﬁc demand, we are able
to accurately approximate the downloading delay cdf. This
may have an interesting practical application: by knowing the
downloading delay of a user as a function of the users positions
in the cell, the system can determine the size of the prebuffering necessary to achieve low stall probability in a video
streaming application. In short, the system will make sure to
pre-buffer enough data such that, when the playback starts, the
downloading delay of the remaining part of the video ﬁle is
¯
less than D by some margin. This ensures that, despite the
playback buffer having a negative drift (playback rate is larger
than the data arrival rate in the buffer), the video playback will
be completed before the buffer is empty with sufﬁciently high
probability.


38 + 20 log10 (r) , r < 40

38 + 20 log10 (40) + . . .

. . . 35 log (r/40) , r > 40
10

File Delay CDF−Baseline Users:300Rad:400m Demand Prob:0.0001
1

Fraction of Files under the delay − (t)

0.9
0.8

Approx Binomial
BFS
PFS
Approx Poisson

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

R EFERENCES

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

500

1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Time in number of slots (measured in coherence time −100ms) −(t)

4500

5000

(a) File Delay CDF-Demand Probability- 0.0001/slot
File Delay CDF−Baseline Users:300 Rad:400m Demand Prob:0.0004
1

Fraction of files under the delay − (t)

0.9
0.8

Approx Binomial
BFS
PFS
Approx Poisson

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

2000

4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Time in number of slots (measured in coherence time −100ms) −(t)

14000

16000

(b) File Delay CDF-Demand Probability- 0.0004/slot
User Delay CDF−Baseline Users:300 Rad:400m Demand Prob:0.00027
1

Fraction of Users under the delay − (t)

0.9
0.8

Approx Binomial
BFS
PFS
Approx Poisson

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

2000

4000
6000
8000
10000
Time in number of slots (measured in coherence time −100ms) −(t)

12000

14000

(c) User Delay CDF-Demand Probability- 0.00027

Fig. 1: Comparsion of the baseline system under the BFS,
PFS and the approximate numerical scheme with binomial and
possion approximations

5

[1] H. Holma and A. Toskala, LTE for UMTS: OFDMA and SC-FDMA
based radio access. John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2009.
[2] H. Kushner and P. Whiting, “Convergence of proportional-fair sharing
algorithms under general conditions,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1250–1259, 2004.
[3] D. Avidor, S. Mukherjee, J. Ling, and C. Papadias, “On some properties of the proportional fair scheduling policy,” in Personal, Indoor
and Mobile Radio Communications, 2004. PIMRC 2004. 15th IEEE
International Symposium on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2004, pp. 853–858.
[4] J. Choi and S. Bahk, “Cell-throughput analysis of the proportional fair
scheduler in the single-cell environment,” IEEE Trans. on Vehic. Tech.,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 766–778, 2007.
[5] E. Liu and K. Leung, “Proportional fair scheduling: analytical insight
under rayleigh fading environment,” in Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference, 2008. WCNC 2008. IEEE. IEEE, 2008, pp.
1883–1888.
[6] E. Liu, Q. Zhang, and K. Leung, “Asymptotic analysis of proportionally
fair scheduling in rayleigh fading,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
no. 99, pp. 1–12, 2011.
[7] S. Borst, “User-level performance of channel-aware scheduling algorithms in wireless data networks,” in INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-Second
Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications.
IEEE Societies, vol. 1. IEEE, 2003, pp. 321–331.
[8] F. Kelly, Reversibility and stochastic networks. Wiley New York, 1979,
vol. 40.
[9] http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537
/ns705/ns827/white paper sc11-520862.pdf.
[10] K. Shanmugam and G. Caire, “Wireless downloading delay under
proportional fair scheduling with coupled service and requests: An
approximated analysis,” in preparation.
[11] L. Georgiadis, M. Neely, M. Neely, and L. Tassiulas, Resource allocation
and cross-layer control in wireless networks. Now Pub, 2006.
[12] M. Neely, “Stochastic Network Optimization with Application to Communication and Queueing Systems,” Synthesis Lectures on Communication Networks, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–211, 2010.
[13] G. Caire, R. Muller, and R. Knopp, “Hard fairness versus proportional
fairness in wireless communications: The single-cell case,” IEEE Trans.
on Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1366–1385, 2007.
[14] G. Grimmett and D. Stirzaker, Probability and Random Processes.
Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.

