Creator:        GPL Ghostscript 905 (ps2write)
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 18:15:46 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:31 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      865222 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.7
ISIT'2012 1569565365

Collective Sensing-Capacity of Bacteria Populations
Arash Einolghozati, Mohsen Sardari, Faramarz Fekri
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
Email:{einolghozati, mohsen.sardari, beirami, fekri}@ece.gatech.edu
react to chemical stimuli. One phenomenon that in particular demonstrates the essential components of communication
among cells is “Quorum Sensing” [1], [2]. Quorum Sensing
can be viewed as a decentralized coordination process which
allows bacteria to estimate the density of their population in
the environment and regulate their behavior accordingly. To
estimate the local population density, bacteria release speciﬁc
signaling molecules. These signal molecules will then reach
the neighboring bacteria providing them with information
about other bacteria in the environment. As the local density of
bacteria increases, so will the concentration of the molecules
in the medium. Bacteria have molecule receptors that can
estimate the molecular concentration and thus the bacteria
population density. Bacteria use quorum sensing to coordinate
energy expensive actions that cannot be carried out by a
single bacterium. This process, captures most of the important
components of a molecular communication system.
New designs are constantly emerging from manipulation of
quorum sensing bacteria’s DNA. The encoding, sending, and
releasing information using living organisms as carriers of data
is studied in [3]. The design of biological clocks using quorum
sensing is introduced in [4]. A model for forming a network
via molecular communication is given in [5]. These studies
have inspired researchers to investigate the communication
among bacteria more carefully and also pay attention to
information theoretical aspects of bacteria communication.
In [6] we studied a discrete noiseless molecular communication channel inspired by diffusion process in the medium
where living organisms dwell in. The information is assumed
to be encoded in the alteration of concentration of molecules
in the medium. In [7], we presented models to account
for the reception process of molecules in a single bacterial
receiver. In [8], we introduced the Molecular Communication
Networking (MCN) paradigm where a population of bacteria
(i.e., the primitive agents) that are clustered together form the
node of a communication network. Such node is considered
to be an independent entity and act as a fairly smart node in
the network. The information is transferred from one node
to another through diffusion of molecules in the medium.
The agents in each node coordinate their actions via quorum
sensing process. The agents in a node sense the concentration
of molecules at steady-state and responds accordingly. This
setup enables us to take advantage of primitive agents in a
network that is designed to perform a speciﬁc task and transfer
information. Motivated by the network framework in [8], in
the present paper, we wish to compute the collective sensing
capacity of each such node. We should also mention that there

Abstract—The design of biological networks using bacteria as
the basic elements of the network is initially motivated by a
phenomenon called quorum sensing. Through quorum sensing,
each bacterium performs sensing the medium and communicating it to others via molecular communication. As a result,
bacteria can orchestrate and act collectively and perform tasks
impossible otherwise. In this paper, we consider a population of
bacteria as a single node in a network. In our version of biological
communication networks, such a node would communicate with
one another via molecular signals. As a ﬁrst step toward such
networks, this paper focuses on the study of the transfer of
information to the population (i.e., the node) by stimulating it
with a concentration of special type of a molecules signal. These
molecules trigger a chain of processes inside each bacteria that
results in a ﬁnal output in the form of light or ﬂuorescence.
Each stage in the process adds noise to the signal carried to the
next stage. Our objective is to measure (compute) the maximum
amount of information that we can transfer to the node. This
can be viewed as the collective sensing capacity of the node. The
molecular concentration, which carries the information, is the
input to the node, which should be estimated by observing the
produced light as the output of the node (i.e., the entire population of bacteria forming the node. The molecules are trapped
in the bacteria receptors forming complexes inside the bacteria
which affect the genes responsible for producing the light. We
focus on the noise caused by the random process of trapping
molecules at the receptors as well as the variation of outputs of
different bacteria in the node. The optimal input distribution to
maximize the mutual information between the output of the node,
e.g., light, and the applied molecule concentration is derived.
Further, the capacity variation with the number of bacteria in
the node and the number of receptors per bacteria is obtained.
Finally, we investigated the collective sensing capability of the
node when a speciﬁc form of molecular signaling concentration
(which resembles M-ary modulation) is used. The achievable
sensing capacity and the corresponding error probabilities were
obtained for such practical signaling techniques.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The idea of exploiting a colony of bacteria to perform
a desired task has been the subject of research in various
biological disciplines and new designs have recently attracted
the attention of researchers in the information theory and
network engineering areas. The basic idea behind such networks is adaptation and engineering of speciﬁc types of bacteria that are capable of sensing, computation, actuation, and
above all, communication with each other [1]. The existence
of a form of communication using molecules that occurs
naturally among bacteria has been conﬁrmed [1]. Such a
communication enables single cells to gather and process
sensory information about their environment and evaluate and
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. CNS-111094

1

exists another line of research which relies on the assumption
that information is encoded in the timing of emission of
molecules that tries to answer analytical questions concerning
the communication in nano-scale through that lens [9], [10].
The output of quorum sensing process can be in various
forms, for example, the bacteria can emit light or produce
Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) which can be used to convey
information to the outside world. In this paper, our goal
is to quantify the maximum amount of information that a
population of bacteria can convey, through luminescence or
ﬂuorescence, given a constant concentration of molecules as
its input. This can then be used to design signaling schemes for
engineering bacteria communication networks such as the one
in [8]. We consider a population of bacteria (i.e., a node) that
is stimulated with a slow varying concentration of molecules.
The output of the node, in the form of light or GFP, is
measured to estimate (i.e., to decode the information) the
concentration of molecules at the vicinity of the node. We use
a probabilistic model to account for discrepancy in behavior of
individual bacteria. We obtain the optimal distribution on input
concentration (i.e., the signal) that results in maximum mutual
information between the input and output (i.e., the maximum
sensing capacity). In addition, we present a signaling technique
and obtain the resulting sensing capacity of the node versus
the corresponding error rate.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II,
we present the problem setup using the related works in
biology and bio-networks. Sec. III discusses the analysis of
the capacity of concentration sensing and Sec. IV introduces a
practical signal technique that can be used to achieve a certain
error rate.
II. P ROBLEM S ETUP
In our previous work [8], we introduced a molecular
communication network consisting of nodes which contain n
bacteria. The information is conveyed in the network from
one node to another through alternation of concentration of
Acyl Homoserine-Lactone (AHL) molecules A surrounding
the nodes. Note that the random variable A represents the
concentration. This concentration is sensed by the bacteria in
the node such that each bacterium emits light or GFP with the
intensity that depends on A. Fig. 1(a) shows a bacterium used
in such a node. The plasmid contains the information (genes)
about production of light and can be added to a bacterium that
does not naturally emit light. Each node is a fairly smart unit
that can measure the total output (e.g., in the form of light)
of the bacteria population residing in the unit and coordinate
their action to alter the concentration of molecular signals (by
emitting new molecules to the medium). Note that, in general,
a node can sense the concentration of one molecule type and
emit to the medium another type of molecular signal (i.e.,
decode and forward the information to the next node without
interference between the input and the output of a node). By
this architecture, we form a reliable node out of collection of
unreliable bacteria.
By measuring the output of bacteria (which as mentioned
before is in the form of light or GFP), the node is able to

estimate the concentration of molecules and hence, decode
the information. The number of differentiable levels of input
and the error in decoding to the right level limit the amount of
information that can be transferred to the node (i.e., sensed by
the node). In this setup, one of the fundamental problems is the
maximum amount of information that can be transferred to a
node and the way it can be achieved. It is important to note that
molecular communication networks has very slow dynamics.
This is because 1. the molecular diffusion, in the channel
connecting two nodes, is very slow, and 2. the chemical
processes inside the bacteria are time consuming. Therefore,
information delivery from one node to another occurs in a
slow pace. Hence, we can assume that molecular signal A
varies slowly in time. Therefore, we can assume that the
concentration of molecules surrounding a node is constant
for sufﬁcient amount of time, allowing the decoding of the
information by the node. Hence, we focus on a receiving node
and compute the sensing capacity of a constant concentration
of molecules around the node. The setup is consistent with the
analysis of the capacity for continuous channels, in which we
sample the signal and measure the capacity per sample (rather
than per seconds). Finally, note that throughout this paper, we
focus on the receiver end and do not study the rate constraints
(in bits per seconds) due to the (bandwidth of the) diffusion
channel. That is why we referred to the maximum information
rate (in bits per sample) as the sensing capacity.
The response of various strands of bacteria to different
levels of inter-cellular AHL molecule concentrations has
been studied extensively and mathematical models for the
chain of chemical reactions it causes inside the bacterium
is provided. In [11], a model consisting of a chain of linear
differential equations is introduced to account for the process
of luminescence or ﬂuorescence in response to presence of
AHL molecules in the medium. These equations capture the
average dynamic behavior of bacteria and also their steadystate behavior. They account for three main stages in the
process: 1) binding of AHL molecules to the cell receptors,
2) production of the AHL+LuxR complex and transcription of
genes responsible for production of light or GFP and ﬁnally,
3) light emission or GFP production. These three stages are
shown in Fig. 1(b). The differential equation accounting for
probability of binding of molecules to the cell receptors is
given by [11]:
p = −κp + Aγ (1 − p) ,
˙
(1)
where A is the concentration of molecules, γ is the input
gain and κ is the dissociation rate of trapped molecules in
the cell receptors. Here, p is the derivative of p with respect
˙
to time. In this model, each cell receptor (i.e., the ligand
receptor) is activated with a probability that depends on the
concentration of molecules in the medium surrounding the cell.
This probability starts to increase from the moment a constant
concentration is applied until it takes its ﬁnal steady-state value
p0 , given by
Aγ
(2)
p0 =
Aγ + κ

2

3

5.5

σ0=0.1
σ0=0.2

C(bits per sample)

C(bits per sample)

6

σ =0.3
0

5

σ0=0.4
σ =0.5
0

4

3
0.5

0.6

0.7
0.8
pmax

0.9

N

(7)

where the last equality comes from the fact that the noise
has zero mean. Hence, for the output deﬁned in (6), we have
E(Y)=nN p0 . By using conditional variance, we have
V ar(Yi ) = E(V ar(Yi |pi )) + V ar(E(Yi |pi ))
= E(N pi (1 − pi )) + V ar(N pi )
(8)

The ﬁrst term in (8) is due to general uncertainty in a Binomial
output and the second one is due to noise in the parameter pi .
By independence assumption between the output of different
bacteria, the variance of the output is equal to
(9)

Since the number of receptors N per bacterium is usually
large enough, the second term is dominating. Hence, we can
approximate the variance by nN 2 σ 2 p2 (1 − p0 )2 .
0
Note that Y can take nN + 1 different levels which results
in a trivial upper bound of log2 (nN + 1) for the mutual
information between A and Y . In order to make the analysis of
the capacity tractable, we approximate the output in (6) with a
Normal random variable. Since the number of receptors N is
large, we can use the Central Limit Theorem and approximate
2
2
Yi by N (N p0 , σYi ) where σYi is given in (8). Hence, the
output Y will be the sum of n Normal variables given by
2
Y = N (nN p0 , σY ) = nN p0 + ǫY

0.6

0.7

pmax

0.8

0.9

1

Amax which maps to probability pmax via (2). This maximum
probability is an indicator of the maximum power used by
the transmitter to emit the molecules into the medium. By
using more power, the transmitter can increase the maximum
concentration of molecules at the vicinity of the receiver node
and increase pmax . We obtain the optimized distribution for
p0 over the interval [0 pmax ] and calculate the capacity based
1
on pmax . We assume pmax to be greater than 2 .
The structure of noise in (10) is complicated since the
noise variance depends on the signal itself. Hence, we use the
numerical method of Blahut-Arimoto algorithm (BA) in order
to obtain the optimal input distribution and its corresponding
capacity. Note that due to above approximations, it will give
us the approximated sensing capacity. As we can see in (9),
the noise power is at its maximum at p0 = 1 and goes to zero
2
when p0 approaches to either zero or one. Hence, we expect
that the distribution of p0 should take values close to 0 and
pmax with a higher probability. The results from the algorithm
conﬁrms this fact and the distribution has local maximums at
0 and pmax .
Results for the capacity (in bits per sample) with respect
2
to pmax for different values of σ0 is shown in Fig. 2. In this
setup, we have chosen N = n = 30. As we observe from
the plot, the capacity increases when we either increase pmax
2
or decrease σ0 . Note that the maximum achievable capacity
is limited even if the transmitter used inﬁnite power to make
2
pmax = 1. Here, we have assumed σ0 to be nonzero but
2
even in the case that σ0 = 0, the capacity is limited. This is
because of the ﬁrst term in the variance of noise in (9) which
does not depend on σ0 and is caused by binomial nature of
the reception process. Note that in practice, N and n are very
large. However due to the exponential growth of the simulation
time with respect to N or n, we only computed the capacity
for small values of N and n.
Fig. 3 shows the capacity versus pmax for different values
of n the number of bacteria in the population, and N the
2
number of receptors per bacterium. Here, σ0 is considered to
be 0.1 during the simulation. As we observe from the plot, by
increasing n or N , the capacity increases but the effect of n is
more signiﬁcant. The reason for that can be explained by (9)
and (10). The input signal increases linearly with both n and

where Yi , (i.e., Yi = j=1 Yij ) is the output of bacterium i.
Using the conditional expectation, we have

2
σY = nN p0 (1 − p0 ) + n(N 2 − N )σ 2 p2 (1 − p0 )2 .
0

4

Fig. 3. Capacity (bits per sample) versus maximum trapping probability
pmax , plotted for different number of bacteria n, and the number of receptors
per bacterium N

Fig. 2. Capacity (bits per sample) versus maximum trapping probability
2
pmax for different values of noise powerσ0

= N p0 (1 − p0 ) + (N 2 − N )σ 2 p2 (1 − p0 )2
0

4.5

3.5
0.5

1

E(Yi ) = E(E(Yi |pi ))) = E(N pi ) = N p0

5

N=10,n=10
N=10,n=20
N=20,n=10
N=20,n=20

(10)

2
where the noise ǫY ∼ N (0, σY ). The ﬁrst term in (10) can
be considered as the signal to be decoded by the node and
the second term is an additive Gaussian noise which has a
signal-dependent variance. In order to calculate the sensing
capacity, we should obtain the optimized distribution of p0
which maximizes I(p0 ; Y ) the mutual information between the
input and output, which in turn gives the optimized distribution
for A through (2).
To proceed, we observe that, in practice, A cannot take
any values and the maximum achievable concentration is

4

N but the variance of the noise increases quadratically with
N and linearly with n.
IV. ACHIEVABLE R ATES UNDER P RACTICAL S IGNALING
(M ODULATION )
In the previous section, the capacity was obtained with the
assumption that A (and hence p0 ) is a continuous variable
between 0 and Amax . In other words, it was assumed that any
concentration of molecules can be achieved by the transmitter
at the vicinity of the node. In practice, a discrete number of
levels of concentration of molecules can be achieved which
results in discrete levels of p0 .
In this section, we consider a speciﬁc signaling method
(i.e., modulation) and study the modulations of input signal
that achieve speciﬁc error rates and compute its achievable
information rate. The range of the input is determined by pmax
at the receptors. The number of levels of concentration and
different choices for those levels introduce different ways of
modulation of information. In essence, given k, the number of
input signal levels, we have to ﬁnd the best k levels to choose
from the interval [0 pmax ] and their corresponding weights
in order to minimize the error of transmission. Since the
variance of the error in the output varies for different inputs,
the ideal analysis as described above will be cumbersome and
actually not practical. This is because of the complexity that
it enforces on the transmitter, which is assumed to be simple.
Here, we use a rather simple but effective modulation of the
input signal in which the k levels are chosen uniformly from
the interval [0 pmax ] and symbols are assumed to be equiprobable. The probability of error can be reduced by increasing
the transmission power which in turn increases pmax . Again
we assume pmax to be always greater than 1 .
2
The most trivial modulation corresponds to k = 2 in which
symbols p0 = 0 and p0 = pmax are transmitted with equal
probability. Ideally if the transmitter is able to make pmax = 1,
we can achieve the data rate of 1 with error probability of zero.
This is because the symbols 0 and 1 do not make any noise
in the receiver (see (5)). Hence, zero error can be achieved in
a binary transmitter with power approaching to inﬁnity.
We consider a hard decision scenario in decoding the
symbols. In other words, the receiver chooses the closest
symbol to the received one. We obtain the error probabilities
pe versus pmax as shown in Fig. 4 for different modulations.
2
The results are given for n = N = 30 and σ0 = 0.1. The
probability of error for k = 2 is practically zero even for ﬁnite
power. We can conclude from Fig. 4, that the communication
is not reliable as k increases. For example, for the case of
k = 32, the probability of error cannot become less than
0.2. However, by increasing N and n, for any k, the scheme
becomes a practical modulation. The experiment is not plotted
due to page limit. Note that pe decreases as pmax increases
but it cannot be made arbitrarily small for a modulation with
large k, unless n and N are large.

0

10

−2

pe

10

−4

10

k=4
k=8
k=16
k=32

−6

10

−8

10

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

pmax

0.9

1

Fig. 4. Probability of error with respect to maximum trapping probability
for different signaling techniques

molecules. The output can be in the form of light or GFP and
contains a noise from the process of trapping of the molecules
and the variation in bacteria responses. the power can be
accounted for by the maximum achieved concentration at the
receiver. The optimal input distribution and the corresponding
capacity were obtained based on the received power. Finally,
we introduced practical modulations that achieve a speciﬁc
data rate and error probability.
R EFERENCES
[1] B. L. Bassler, “How bacteria talk to each other: regulation of gene
expression by quorum sensing.” Curr Opin Microbiol, vol. 2, no. 6,
pp. 582–587, Dec 1999.
[2] H. B. Kaplan and E. P. Greenberg, “Diffusion of autoinducer is involved
in regulation of the vibrio ﬁscheri luminescence system.” J. Bacteriol.,
vol. 163, no. 3, pp. 1210–1214, Sep 1985.
[3] M. A. Palacios, E. Benito-Pea, M. Manesse, A. D. Mazzeo,
C. N. LaFratta, G. M. Whitesides, and D. R. Walt,
“Infobiology by printed arrays of microorganism colonies for
timed and on-demand release of messages,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2011/09/19/1109554108.abstract
[4] T. Danino, O. Mondragn-Palomino, L. Tsimring, and J. Hasty, “A
synchronized quorum of genetic clocks.” Nature, vol. 463, no. 7279,
pp. 326–330, Jan 2010.
[5] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, and M. Pierobon, “Nanonetworks: A new
frontier in communications,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 54,
no. 11, pp. 84–89, Nov 2011.
[6] A. Einolghozati, M. Sardari, A. Beirami, and F. Fekri, “Capacity of
discrete molecular diffusion channels,” in 2011 IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2011).
[7] A. Einolghozati, M. Sardari, , and F. Fekri, “Capacity of diffusionbased molecular communication with ligand receptors,” in 2011 IEEE
Information Theory Workshop.
[8] A. Einolghozati, M. Sardari, A. Beirami, and F. Fekri, “Data gathering
in networks of bacteria colonies: Collective sensing and relaying using
molecular communication,” in NetSciCom Workshop at 31th Annual
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM 2012).
[9] K. V. Srinivas, R. S. Adve, and A. W. Eckford, “Molecular communication in ﬂuid media: The additive inverse gaussian noise channel,”
arXiv:1012.0081v2.
[10] Y. Tsai, C. Rose, R. Song, and I. Mian, “An additive exponential
noise channel with a transmission deadline,” in Information Theory
Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on, 31 2011aug. 5 2011, pp. 718 –722.
[11] J. Muller, C. Kuttler, and B. A. Hense, “Sensitivity of the quorum
sensing system is achieved by low pass ﬁltering.” Bio Systems, vol. 92,
no. 1, pp. 76–81, 2008.

V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the transfer of information to a population of bacteria by stimulating them with a concentration of

5

