Title:          bool.eps
Subject:        gnuplot plot
Author:         dousse
Creator:        gnuplot 4.6 patchlevel 0
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 20:21:00 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:32 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      305856 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569565171

Percolation in Directed Random Geometric Graphs
Olivier Dousse
Nokia Research Center
Lausanne, Switzerland
Email: olivier.dousse@nokia.com

In most models, the critical density at which this happens
is well below the density required to percolate the network
without using unidirectional links. Thus, our result shows that
there is a measurable gain in using unidirectional links.

Abstract—The connectivity graph of wireless networks, under
many models as well as in practice, may contain unidirectional
links. The simplifying assumption that such links are useless is
often made, mainly because most wireless protocols use per-hop
acknowledgments. However, two-way communication between a
pair of nodes can be established as soon as there exists paths in
both directions between them. Therefore, instead of discarding
unidirectional links, one might be interested in studying the
strongly connected components of the connectivity graph.
In this paper, we look at the percolation phenomenon in some
directed random geometric graphs that can be used to model
wireless networks. We show that among the nodes that can
be reached from the origin, a non-zero fraction can also reach
the origin. In other words, the percolation threshold for strong
connectivity is equal to the threshold for one-way connectivity.

II. R ELATED W ORK
Surprisingly little attention have been paid to the connectivity of directed random geometric graphs, although some
directed models have been addressed in previous works. A
popular model that generates a directed connectivity graph
is the k-nearest neighbor model. A percolation phenomenon
has been shown in this model for the ﬁrst time in [2].
However, in this paper, only its undirected version is studied.
In [3], Balister and Bollob´ s consider its directed version and
a
compute a lower bound on the “weak” percolation threshold
as well as an upper bound on the strong percolation threshold.
However, they do not attempt to show equalities between the
thresholds. In [4], Sarkar and Haenggi use a similar approach
to derive bounds on the percolation thresholds of the so-called
secrecy graph, originally introduced in [5]. The SINR-based
connectivity model, originally presented in [6], also generates a directed graph. However, a percolation phenomenon
was only shown for the case where unidirectional links are
discarded.
Finally, we note that an entire ﬁeld of percolation theory,
called oriented percolation (or directed percolation) is devoted
to the study of connectivity in oriented lattices (see [7] for a
survey). In these models, however, strong connectivity is not
possible.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Continuum percolation models have become popular for
the modelization of the connectivity of wireless multi-hop
networks. The ﬁrst such model, introduced by Gilbert [1], is
quite simple and is based on the assumption that the nodes of
the network have a ﬁxed transmission range. More elaborated
models have been developed to capture more speciﬁc aspects
of wireless networks, such as fading or interference. It turns
out that in these models, unlike in Gilbert’s model, one can
ﬁnd pairs of nodes such that the ﬁrst can reliably transmit data
to the second, but not the other way around; we call these unidirectional links. Such a situation is problematic if the protocol
used in the network prescribes per-hop acknowledgments, like
it is that case for instance in IEEE 802.11: according to such
protocols, the receiving node must immediately acknowledge
the reception of the data packet to the sender, which it cannot
do if the link is unidirectional. Therefore, unidirectional links
have most often been ignored and the study of the connectivity
of wireless multi-hop networks restricted to the set of bidirectional links.
However, two nodes can be networked as soon as there
exist a forward and a backward route between them, even
if these routes are distinct. In other words, they only need
to belong to the same strongly connected component of the
connectivity graph. In this paper, we study the emergence
of a giant strongly connected component in directed random
geometric graphs. We introduce two generalizations of popular
undirected models for wireless multi-hop networks. Our main
ﬁnding is that as soon as the out-component of the origin
(the set of the nodes to which there is a directed path from
the origin) is inﬁnite with positive probability, there exists a
unique inﬁnite strongly connected component in the network.

III. M ODELS
The directed random geometric graph models considered
in this paper are extensions of popular and well studied
undirected graph models. In these models, the vertices of the
graph are assimilated to the points of an underlying (random)
point process in I d . In this work, we only consider models
R
where the point process is a Poisson point process, denoted
by X, of intensity λ. Then, each model prescribes different
probabilities for the existence of edges (respectively arcs)
between these points.
A. The Poisson Boolean Model
In the original Boolean model (also known as “blob model”
or “germ grain model”, abbreviated hereafter BM), each point
of X is the center of a closed ball of random radius. The
radii of the balls are independent of each other and identically

1

distributed. The (undirected) connectivity graph is obtained
by adding an edge between all pairs of points whose balls
overlap, i.e. S(x) ∩ S(y) = ∅ where S(x), S(y) denote the
balls centered on x, y respectively.
In order to obtain a directed model, we slightly change the
above rule and put an arc (i.e. a directed edge) between x and
y if y ∈ S(x) and an arc between y and x if x ∈ S(y). We
call this new model the Directed Boolean Model (DBM). It
can be used, for instance, to model a wireless network where
nodes do not all have the same transmit power.

is no natural deﬁnition of a connected component. Instead, we
deﬁne several types of connected components:
• Wout (out-component of the origin): the set of vertices
that can be reached from the origin by following arcs of
the connectivity graph
• Win (in-component of the origin): the set of nodes from
which one can reach the origin by following arcs of the
connectivity graph
• Ws (strongly connected component of the origin): deﬁned
as Wout ∩ Win
• Wvs (very strongly connected component of the origin):
the set of points that are connected to the origin in both
directions following the same path.
The latter component corresponds to the connected component
of the origin if one discards all unidirectional links in the
graph.
For each of the above sets, we deﬁne the respective percolation functions and percolation thresholds similarly as in
the undirected case. In order to avoid repetitions, we let ‘x’
denote successively ‘out’, ‘in’, ‘s’ and ‘vs’, and deﬁne the
percolation function as θx (λ) := P0 (|Wx | = ∞) , and the
percolation threshold as λx := inf{λ > 0 : θx (λ) > 0}.
Since Wvs ⊆ Ws = Wout ∩ Win , we have immediately that
θvs (λ) ≤ θs (λ) ≤ min{θout (λ), θin (λ)}, and thus λvs ≥ λs ≥
max{λout , λin }.
3) Modiﬁed percolation functions: In order to formulate
and prove our results, we need to deﬁne further (non-standard)
percolation functions. For each type of component, using ‘x’
as a wildcard for ‘un’, ‘out’, ‘in’, ‘s’ and ‘vs’, we deﬁne

B. The Poisson Random-Connection Model
The standard Poisson random-connection model (abbreviated hereafter RCM) is obtained from as follows: for any pair
of points x, y ∈ X, we add an edge between x and y with
probability g(|x − y|) independently of all other pairs. g(·)
is called the connection function of the model and is a nonincreasing function from I + into [0, 1].
R
As an extension of this model, a directed connectivity graph
can be generated simply by adding arcs between any pair of
points independently with the same probability. Thus, for any
pair of points x, y, we decide independently whether to add an
arc from x to y and whether to add an arc between y and x,
both with probability g(|x − y|). We call this modiﬁed model
the Directed Random-Connection Model (DRCM).
The above deﬁnitions are quite intuitive but do not constitute
formal deﬁnitions. However, rigorous deﬁnitions of the DBM
(respectively DRCM) can be formulated by applying minor
changes to the deﬁnition of the BM (respectively RCM). See
e.g. [8] pages 14–20. In the interest of space, we skip this
formal step.

γx (λ) := inf P0 z ∈ Wx z ∈ X
z∈I d
R

and the corresponding modiﬁed thresholds µx := inf{λ >
0 : γx (λ) > 0}. γx (λ) is, in words, a lower bound on the
probability that two arbitrarily distant points are connected
together. As we will see below, the corresponding threshold
deﬁnes a stronger notion of percolation, which requires the
origin to be connected not only to an inﬁnite number of nodes,
but to a positive fraction of all the nodes. As for the standard
thresholds, we have

C. Continuum Percolation
1) Undirected models: In undirected graphs, the percolation phenomenon is characterized by the emergence of an
inﬁnite connected component as soon as the node density λ
is above a certain threshold. More formally, for both Boolean
and random-connection models, we denote by P0 the Palm
distribution of the model, i.e., the probability measure under
the condition that X has a point located exactly at the
origin1 deﬁned as P0 (·) := P · 0 ∈ X . Next, we denote
by Wun the connected component of the point located at the
origin. We then deﬁne the percolation function as θun (λ) :=
P0 (|Wun | = ∞) .
The main result of continuum percolation theory is that in
both the BM and RCM, there exists a critical density λun such
that θun (λ) = 0 if λ < λun and θun (λ) > 0 if λ > λun .2
2) Directed models: In the directed case, one should take
more care in deﬁning the the percolation function. Indeed,
since connectedness is no-longer a symmetric relation, there

µvs ≥ µs ≥ max{µout , µin }.

(1)

IV. R ESULTS
The central question of this paper is whether the percolation
thresholds deﬁned above are all different or whether some are
equal. In a ﬁrst step, we show results that hold for both the
DBM and the DRCM. Then, we show stronger results for the
DRCM. For the sake of readability, in this section, we only
state the results and explain how they relate to each other. The
proofs are given in Section V.
A. Common results

1 We know from Slivnyak’s theorem that considering the Palm distribution
of the Poisson point process is equivalent to adding a point at the origin. More
on this topic can be found e.g. in [9].
2 This result is true under some mild conditions on the distribution of the
ball radii (resp. on the connection function g), see Chapter 3.3 (resp. Chapter
6.1) in [8].

The theorems in this section are consequences of the socalled FKG inequality and a uniqueness property, which we
establish for the DBM and DRCM in Section V. Therefore,
they apply also to any model for which one can establish

2

1

similar properties. We start with a simple lemma that shows
that our modiﬁed percolation thresholds are actually higher
than the standard ones.
Lemma 1: For ‘x’ denoting either ‘un’, ‘out’, ‘in’, ‘s’ or
‘vs’, we have that λx ≤ µx .
This result is quite intuitive: above the standard threshold,
the connected component of the origin Wx is inﬁnite with nonzero probability, whereas above the modiﬁed threshold, every
point of the graph has non-zero probability to be in Wx . The
latter property clearly implies the former.
We then proceed to the central theorem of this paper,
which states that the modiﬁed percolation threshold for strong
connectivity is the same as the modiﬁed percolation threshold
for one-way connectivity.
Theorem 1: µout = µin = µs .
The drawback of Theorem 1 is that it is formulated in
terms of the modiﬁed percolation thresholds. The next theorem
shows that for some types of connectivity, the two sorts of
threshold are actually equivalent.
Theorem 2: For ‘x’ denoting either ‘un’, ‘s’ or ‘vs’, it is the
case that µx = λx . (notice that ‘out’ and ‘in’ are not listed)
The key ingredient of the proof of this theorem is the
uniqueness of the inﬁnite connected component. Indeed, the
undirected, strong and very strong connectivity relations are
all symmetric and deﬁne an equivalence relation. Thus, they
deﬁne equivalence classes –the connected components– which
form a partition of X. Hence, the event that two points are
connected can be reformulated as the event that the two points
belong to the same component. Moreover, percolation theory
provides methods to show that in our models, there can only be
one inﬁnite component. Thus, if two points are such that their
component is inﬁnite, then necessarily they are connected.
Such a reasoning is of course not applicable to the outand in-components because they do not deﬁne a partition
of X. Nevertheless, we believe that for those components,
the modiﬁed thresholds are also equal to the standard ones.
Whereas we can prove this fact for the DRCM (see the section
below), we can only conjecture this result for the DBM:
Conjecture 1: µout = λout and µin = λin .
The conjecture, combined with Theorem 1, implies that
λout = λin = λs . This is conﬁrmed by the simulation results
shown in Figure 1.

0.8

0.6

0.4

θout (λ)
θin (λ)
θs (λ)
θvs (λ)

0.2

0
4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

λ
Fig. 1. Simulation results for the DBM. Whereas we see that λout = λin =
λs < λvs , it appears that interestingly, the out-component is much bigger than
the in-component in this model.

points that remain connected to the origin if one discards
all unidirectional links in the connectivity graph. It is thus
interesting to verify that the percolation threshold associated
with it is indeed higher than the other thresholds.
Consider a point x in Wvs . By deﬁnition, there must be
a sequence of points x0 = 0, x1 , . . . , xn = x such that for
each i = 1, . . . , n, there is an arc from xi−1 to xi and an
arc from xi to xi−1 . For each i, this happens with probability
g 2 (|xi − xi−1 |). This simple reasoning allows to see that in
fact, the very strongly connected component in the DRCM
with connection function g(·) follows the same distribution
as the connected component in the RCM with connection
function g 2 (·). Therefore, to show that λun < λvs , it is enough
to show that in the RCM, replacing g(·) with g 2 (·) does
increase the percolation threshold λvs .
Deriving the class of connection functions g for which it is
the case is beyond the scope of this paper4 . Instead, we show
an example where the strict inequality can be easily proved.
Proposition 1: Consider the DRCM with connection function g(x) = e−αx for some α > 0. In this model, we have
λs < λvs .
To verify this proposition, it sufﬁces to observe that with an
exponential connection function, doubling the exponent α is
equivalent to decreasing the density λ by a factor 2d .
V. U NDERLYING

B. The random-connection model
The DRCM represent only a small generalization of the
RCM, and many critical values of these two models are
actually equal. The following theorem allows to link the two
models.
Theorem 3: In the (D)RCM, the points processes Wun , Wout
and Win are identically distributed.3
The theorem implies that λun = λout = λin and that
µun = µout = µin . Therefore, it also proves Conjecture 1
for the DRCM. We look now at the very strongly connected
component Wvs . Recall that Wvs is deﬁned as the set of the

TECHNICAL RESULTS

A. The FKG inequality
The proof of the theorems and lemma below make use of the
so-called FKG inequality5. This inequality states that increasing events, i.e. events that do not cease to occur if one adds
points, edges or arcs in the graph, are positively correlated. The
FKG inequality has been proved for the (undirected) Boolean
model in [11], and the extension of their proof to the DBM
is straightforward. However, to the knowledge of the author,
4 The strict inequality can not hold in general, since there are many
connection functions such that g(x) = g 2 (x) ∀x ≥ 0.
5 This inequality has been named after the initials of the others of [10],
where it appeared for the ﬁrst time.

3 As a subset of the Poisson point process X, the set of points connected
to the origin Wx can also be seen as a (non-stationary) point process.

3

any two increasing edge-dependent events A and B we have

such an inequality has not been established for the RCM, and a
fortiori not for the DRCM. We have thus to establish a similar
inequality for these models. Again, the proofs for the directed
and undirected models are very similar, and we thus show it
only for the undirected model.
We start with a formal deﬁnition of an increasing event.
Consider two realizations of ω and ω ′ of the RCM. We deﬁne
the partial ordering
as ω
ω ′ if and only if ω ′ can be
obtained by adding points and edges to ω. An event A is called
increasing if for every ω
ω ′ we have 1A (ω) ≤ 1A (ω ′ ).
Furthermore, we call an event B edge-dependent if we have
1B (ω) = 1B (ω ′ ) whenever ω and ω ′ contain the exact same
set of edges (i.e. they differ only by the addition or removal
of points of degree zero).
Lemma 2 (FKG inequality): If A and B are both increasing
and edge-dependent events, then P(A ∩ B) ≥ P(A) P(B) .
Proof: The proof below is an adapted version of the proof
by Roy[11]. We consider the lattice Ln = (2−n Z)d . For any
k = (k1 , . . . , kd ) ∈ Zd , let Cn (k) denote the cell {x ∈ I d :
R
(ki − 1)2−n < xi ≤ ki 2−n for every i = 1, . . . , d} where
x = (x1 , . . . , xd ). Thus the cells Cn (k) form a partition of
I d . For any unordered pair of cells Cn (k) and Cn (k ′ ), we
R
deﬁne the random variable On (k, k ′ ) to be equal to 1 if there
exists an edge having an end in Cn (k) and the other end in
Cn (k ′ ), and to 0 otherwise.
Let Fn be the σ-algebra generated by all the variables
On (k, k ′ ). Then for any edge-dependent event A, {1A |Fn , n ≥
1} is a martingale with respect to Fn . By the martingale
convergence theorem, we have
E 1A Fn → 1A a.s. as n → ∞.

P0 A ∩ B z ∈ X ≥ P0 A z ∈ X P0 B z ∈ X . (4)
The same inequality can also be veriﬁed for the BM and DBM.
B. Uniqueness of the inﬁnite component
As explained in Section IV-A, Theorem 2 requires that the
inﬁnite connected component is unique. The uniqueness of
the inﬁnite component has been proved for the (undirected)
Boolean model in [12]. Their proof can easily be adapted to
prove the uniqueness of the inﬁnite strongly and very strongly
connected components in the DBM.
A similar uniqueness result for the RCM has been proved
in [13]. Again, the proof proposed in this paper can easily be
adapted to the DRCM to prove the uniqueness of the inﬁnite
strongly and very strongly connected components.
C. Proof of Lemma 1
We prove the lemma for the out-component, i.e. when ‘x’
denotes ‘out’. The other cases can be proved with identical
arguments.
Deﬁne the random variable R ∈ I ∪ {∞} as the radius of
R
Wout , i.e. R := sup{|x| : x ∈ Wout }. Now for some z ∈ I d ,
R
consider the ball B(z) of unit volume centered on z. Using
the deﬁnition of γout (λ), we have that P0 (Wout ∩ B(z) = ∅) ≥
e−λ γout (λ). It is easy to see that for any z ∈ I d , {Wout ∩
R
B(z) = ∅} ⊆ {R ≥ |z| − rd }, where rd denotes the radius
of the unit d-dimensional ball. Thus, P0 (R ≥ |z| − rd ) ≥
P0 (Wout ∩ B(z) = ∅) ≥ e−λ γout (λ) ∀z ∈ I d . This implies
R
that, P0 (R = ∞) ≥ e−λ γout (λ). Furthermore, it is not hard
to show that if R = ∞, then |Wout | = ∞. Hence we have
θout (λ) = P0 (|Wout | = ∞) ≥ P0 (R = ∞) ≥ e−λ γout (λ),
which implies that µout ≥ λout .

(2)

Also, E 1A Fn is a function of the variables On (k, k ′ ). It
is not too hard but tedious to verify that if A is an increasing
event, then E 1A Fn is an increasing function of these
variables. One can also verify that the joint distribution of the
On (k, k ′ ) fulﬁlls the lattice condition (Condition A in [10])
required to apply the standard FKG inequality. In the interest
of space, we skip this veriﬁcation. Thus, for two increasing
edge-dependent events A and B, we apply the FKG inequality
to the two (increasing) functions E 1A Fn and E 1B Fn :

D. Proof of Theorem 1
The fact that µout = µin follows immediately from the
deﬁnition of γout (λ) and γin (λ) (which are also equal). The
other equality is an immediate consequence of the FKG
inequality: using (4), we have for any z ∈ I d
R

E E 1 A Fn E 1 B Fn
≥ E E 1 A Fn E E 1 B Fn
= E(1A ) E(1B )

P0 z ∈ Ws z ∈ X

(3)

= P0 0

Letting n tend to inﬁnity and applying Lebesgue’s dominated
convergence theorem, we have from (2)
E E 1 A Fn E 1 B Fn

z z∈X
0 z∈X

= P0 0
≥ P0 0

→ E(1A 1B ) .

z and z

z z ∈ X P0 z

2
0 z ∈ X ≥ γout (λ).

2
This implies that γs (λ) ≥ γout (λ) and hence that µs ≤ µout .
Combined with (1), this proves the equality of the thresholds.

From (3) we can conclude that P(AB) ≥ P(A) P(B).
Using a similar proof technique, one can actually show
that the same inequality holds if one adds extra points to the
underlying Poisson process6 . Thus, for any z ∈ I d and for
R

E. Proof of Theorem 2
We show the proof for the undirected model; the other cases
follow identical arguments. Denote by C∞ the unique inﬁnite

6 In fact, this simply increases the probability of some variables O (k, k ′ ),
n
but the lattice condition remains fulﬁlled.

4

We also note that Ei (x, y), i = 1, 2, 3 are independent of each
other and have the same probability g(|x − y|). Furthermore,
we observe that F does not depend on the arcs between x and
y and are thus independent of Ei (x, y), i = 1, 2, 3. Hence,
form (5) we get

connected component of the graph. For any point z, we have
P0 0
z z∈X
≥ P0 0 ∈ C∞ and z ∈ C∞ z ∈ X
(4)

≥ P0 0 ∈ C∞ z ∈ X P0 z ∈ C∞ z ∈ X
≥ P0 (0 ∈ C∞ ) P z ∈ C∞ z ∈ X

3

P0 (E ′ (x, y)) =

2

2
= P0 (0 ∈ C∞ ) = θun (λ).
2
Therefore, we have γun (λ) ≥ θun (λ), which, combined with
Lemma 1, implies the result.

i=1

Also, since Ei (x, y), i = 1, 2, 3 have the same probability and
are independent of F , we can conclude from (5) that E ′ (x, y)
is also independent of F .

The equality of the distributions of Wout and Win follows
from the deﬁnition of the model. We show the equality of the
distributions of Wun and Wout by a coupling argument: we
start by generating an undirected graph G = (X, E) using
the standard RCM. Then we generate a directed graph Gd =
(X, A) on the same set of points using the DRCM so that E
and A are independent conditioned on X. Finally, we construct
a set of “coupled” edges E ′ such that the marginal distribution
′
of G′ = (X, E ′ ) is that of the RCM and such that Wun = Wout ,
′
where Wun denotes the connected component of the origin in
G′ .
We construct E ′ by visiting each element of X and add the
edges adjacent to it. We start at the origin and add an edge
between the origin and all vertices that are direct successors
of the origin in Gd . Next, we inspect each of these direct
successors by order of distance to the origin. Since Gd is
a.s. locally ﬁnite, there are ﬁnitely many of them. For each
successor x, we proceed similarly as for the origin: we look
at the direct successors of x in Gd , excluding the vertices that
we have already visited, and add edges to all of them.
By following this procedure, we eventually determine the
set of edges that have an end in Wout . For all the pairs that
we have not visited, i.e. the pairs with both ends in outside of
Wout , we simply copy the edges from E.
We claim that this construction complies with the RCM,
i.e. that the presence of and edge in E ′ between each pair of
points has the correct probability and is indeed independent
of all the other edges. To see this, consider two points x and
y and observe that the presence of an edge between them
depends a priori on the following events:
• E1 (x, y): existence of an edge between x and y in E
• E2 (x, y): existence of an arc form x to y in A
• E3 (x, y): existence of an arc form y to x in A
• The realization of a variable F ∈ {1, 2, 3} indicating
how x and y are connected to the origin in Gd : F = 1
indicates that x and y are not in Wout , F = 2 that x is
visited ﬁrst in the above construction, and F = 3 that y
is visited ﬁrst.
The event E ′ (x, y) that there is a edge between x and y in
′
E can be reformulated as:

VI. C ONCLUSION
Although the two models presented in this paper are extensions of rather simple existing models, they allow to capture
the effect of directed links on the connectivity of wireless
networks. We showed that using unidirectional links actually
lowers the threshold for long-range two-way connectivity.
Also, the proof of this main result can be generalized to more
sophisticated models if some underlying results, which we
have listed explicitly, are available for these models.
As a by-product, we provide an FKG inequality for the
random-connection model, which may be of independent
interest to readers interested in percolation theory.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. N. Gilbert, “Random plane networks,” SIAM J., vol. 9, pp. 533–543,
1961.
[2] O. H¨ ggstr¨ m and R. Meester, “Nearest neighbor and hard sphere
a
o
models in continuum percolation,” Random Structures & Algorithms,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 295–315, 1996.
[3] P. Balister and B. Bollob´ s, “Percolation in the k-nearest neighbor
a
graph,” 2008, submitted. Available at http://www.msci.memphis.edu/
∼pbalistr/papers/kperc.pdf.
[4] A. Sarkar and M. Haenggi, “Percolation in the secrecy graph,” 2011,
submitted. Available at http://www.nd.edu/∼ mhaenggi/pubs/dam11.pdf.
[5] M. Haenggi, “The Secrecy Graph and Some of its Properties,” in
2008 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT’08),
Toronto, Canada, Jul. 2008.
[6] O. Dousse, F. Baccelli, and P. Thiran, “Impact of interferences on
connectivity of ad hoc networks,” in Proc. IEEE Infocom, San Francisco,
Apr. 2003.
[7] R. Durrett, “Oriented percolation in two dimensions,” Ann. probab.,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 999–1040, 1984.
[8] R. Meester and R. Roy, Continuum percolation. Cambridge University
Press, 1996.
[9] J. F. C. Kingman, Poisson Processes. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993.
[10] C. M. Fortuin, P. W. Kasteleyn, and J. Ginibre, “Correlation inequalities
on some partially ordered sets,” Communications in Mathematical
Physics, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 89103, 1971.
[11] R. Roy, “The russo-seymour-welsh theorem and the equality of critical
densities and the dual critical densities for continuum percolation on
I 2 ,” Ann. probab., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1563–1575, 1990.
R
[12] R. Meester and R. Roy, “Uniqueness of unbounded occupied and vacant
components in boolean models,” Ann. appl. probab., vol. 4, no. 3, pp.
933–951, 1994.
[13] R. M. Burton and R. W. J. Meester, “Long range percolation in stationary
point processes,” Random Structures & Algorithms, vol. 4, no. 2, pp.
177–190, 1993.

3

{F = i} ∩ Ei (x, y)

P0 (Ei (x, y)) P0 (F = i) = g(|x − y|).

=

F. Proof of Theorem 3

E ′ (x, y) :=

P0 (Ei (x, y) and F = i)
i=1
3

(5)

i=1

5

