Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.18:2249
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 22:49:34 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:55:08 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      468516 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566749

A Serial Concatenation of Coding and
Trellis Shaping for OFDM Systems
with Peak Power Reduction
Ryota Yoshizawa and Hideki Ochiai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Yokohama National University
79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya, Yokohama, Kanagawa 240-8501, Japan
Email: yoshizawa@ochiailab.dnj.ynu.ac.jp, hideki@ynu.ac.jp
TS neither requires transmission of side information nor introduces nonlinear distortion, it is applicable to many systems
with severe EVM limitation.
TS was originally proposed for average power reduction
of QAM signals by Forney [4]. It was then applied to peak
power reduction of single-carrier signals in [5]. Recently, by
extending this approach, it is demonstrated in [6] that near
constant envelope single-carrier signals can be generated. On
the other hand, the application of TS to PAPR reduction of
OFDM signals was proposed in [7], and a low-complexity
technique that makes use of the autocorrelation property of
transmit symbols in frequency domain was proposed in [8].
More recently, the use of sequential decoding together with
a time-domain metric is proposed in [9] for computational
complexity reduction.
In general, TS for PAPR reduction requires constellation
expansion similar to coded modulations (CM), but unlike CM
it does not offer any error correcting capability. This indicates
that the relative noise margin is reduced. In other words, if
we compare the system with and without TS under the same
energy constraint per information bit, there is a performance
degradation for the former in terms of bit error rate (BER)
or corresponding required signal-to-noise power ratio (SNR)
unless average power is also reduced.
It is well known that channel coding is essential for
OFDM systems to achieve frequency diversity over frequencyselective fading channels. However, to the best of the authors’
knowledge, coded modulation performance of trellis shaped
OFDM system with PAPR reduction over frequency-selective
fading channels has not been rigorously investigated yet.
In this paper, we propose a serial concatenation of channel
coding and trellis shaping in the framework of OFDM with
PAPR reduction. To extract the soft output from the trellis
shaping bits that are originally designed for PAPR reduction,
a novel BJCR-based log likelihood ratio (LLR) calculation
is introduced. As outer binary codes, both low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes and convolutional codes are investigated.
The resulting proposed system can be seen as a special form
of a bit interleaved coded modulation (BICM) [10, 11]. It will
be shown that the proposed serial concatenation of LDPC
codes and TS can signiﬁcantly improve the frame error rate
performance.

Abstract— Orthogonal
frequency-division
multiplexing
(OFDM) can achieve remarkable performance in terms of
spectral efﬁciency. However, its well-known drawback is that
the OFDM signals have high peak-to-average power ratio
(PAPR), and this causes performance degradation in terms
of power ampliﬁer (PA) efﬁciency. Trellis shaping (TS) is an
effective method to reduce PAPR without signal distortion by
exploiting the trellis structure at the transmitter. In practice,
OFDM should be combined with channel coding in order to
achieve frequency diversity. In this paper, we propose a serial
concatenation of channel coding and trellis shaping such that
the frequency diversity effect and peak power reduction can
be simultaneously achieved. A novel BCJR-based LLR metric
calculation for trellis shaping bits is introduced for this purpose.
The effectiveness of the proposed approach is conﬁrmed by
simulation over AWGN and frequency-selective fading channels.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) has
excellent performance in terms of spectral efﬁciency as well
as its robustness against frequency-selective fading channels.
OFDM signaling is thus adopted by various wireless communications systems, including wireless local area networks
(LAN) and 3GPP long term evolution (LTE). The well-known
drawback of the OFDM signal is its high peak-to-average
power ratio (PAPR). As a result, linear ampliﬁcation of OFDM
signal requires a large input back-off (IBO) operation of the
power ampliﬁer (PA) at the ﬁnal stage of the transmitter, and
this substantially degrades its power efﬁciency.
Various techniques have been proposed for PAPR reduction
of OFDM signals. One of the simplest methods is the deliberate clipping and ﬁltering (CAF) (e.g., [1, 2]). This approach
causes nonlinear in-band distortion and thus is difﬁcult to
be applied to the communication standards that have a strict
limitation in terms of error vector magnitude (EVM). Selected
mapping (SLM) [3] is another well-known approach but its
peak power reduction capability is limited, considering the
increase of transmitter complexity and the side information
overhead required for every OFDM symbol. Furthermore,
these two methods consider only PAPR reduction and they
in general may not be used for average power reduction.
Trellis shaping (TS) is known as a ﬂexible method to reduce
PAPR and average power of OFDM signals by controlling
signal transition exploiting the structure of trellis codes. Since

1

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1.

Serial concatenation of TS and error correcting codes.
(a) Transmitter. (b) Receiver.

A. Metric Design

Trellis shaping system. (a) Transmitter. (b) Receiver.

The FD metric is based on the fact that if the autocorrelation
of the transmitted symbol sequence in frequency domain is
close to an impulse, the resulting instantaneous power becomes
ﬂattened (and thus the PAPR becomes lower).
This metric is deﬁned as a sum of squares of the autocorrelation sidelobes:

II. T RELLIS S HAPING
We brieﬂy review the TS system for OFDM with PAPR
reduction. A basic block diagram of the general TS system is
described in Fig. 1. In this ﬁgure, G denotes the generator
(
)T
matrix of a convolutional code, HT and H−1
denote
the parity check matrix and its left inverse matrix for this
code, respectively. For a detailed description of trellis shaping
for PAPR reduction, we refer to [8]. In the framework of
trellis shaping, we control the signal transition by adding the
codeword from encoder G to the most signiﬁcant bits (MSB)
(
)T
encoded with H−1 , and for our scenario, we search for
a suitable codeword from G that minimizes the PAPR. In
this paper, we use a rate-1/2 code for shaping and a Viterbi
algorithm is used for searching for the codeword. As a metric
of ﬁnding the suitable codeword, one may either use a timedomain (TD) metric proposed in [7, 9] or a frequency-domain
(FD) metric proposed in [8]. In terms of PAPR distribution,
the TD metric with higher complexity may achieve better
performance [9]. Nevertheless, our previous study [12] shows
that the FD metric outperforms the TD metric in terms
of resulting bit error rates (BER) over nonlinear channels.
Therefore, in this paper, we only review and evaluate the
performance of the FD metric in what follows.
Throughout this paper, we consider the so-called sign-bit
shaping [4, 8] where each two-bit shaping output (as MSB)
chooses the quadrant of the QAM constellation. Furthermore,
as a QAM constellation mapping for TS, we consider the
use of Type-1 and Type-2 mappings described in [8]. Type1 mapping consists of an origin-symmetric mapping for LSB
and thus energy remains the same regardless of the selected
quadrants. Consequently, Type-1 mapping does not reduce the
average power and thus works exclusively for PAPR reduction.
On the other hand, the Type-2 mapping does not have this
property and is able to reduce both the peak and the average
power of OFDM signals.

µ(i)

i−1
∑

|Rm |2 ,

(1)

m=1

where i is the level of trellis (i = 1, 2, · · · , N ), Rm denotes
the aperiodic autocorrelation function of the mapping symbol
sequence A = {A0 , A1 , · · · , AN −1 }, and N is the number of
subcarriers per OFDM symbol. This minimization process can
be transformed into a recursive form [8] as follows:
µ(i) = µ(i−1) +

i−2
∑

2

i−1
{
} ∑
(i−1)∗ (i−1)
(i−1)
Rm
δm
+
|δm |2 ,

m=1

m=1

(2)
(i)

(i−1)

(i−1)

for i = 2, 3, . . . , N , m =
+ δm
where Rm = Rm
(i)
∗
Ai Ai−m . Note that, all possible
1, 2, . . . , i − 1, and δm
(i)
(i)
entries δm and |δm |2 can be computed and tabulated from
the constellation mapping beforehand for computational complexity reduction.
Finally, the sequence A is converted to time domain samples
by (at least N -point) inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT).
By adding a guard interval of appropriate length and passing
the signal through a low-pass ﬁlter, we obtain a continuous
baseband OFDM signal.
III. C ODED M ODULATION F RAMEWORKS FOR T RELLIS
S HAPED OFDM
In this paper, we consider the coded trellis shaping system
in the form of serial concatenation of TS and channel coding
as described in Fig. 2. The bit interleaving and deinterleaving
are applied as shown in Fig. 2, where π denotes the bit
interleaver, and π −1 denotes the corresponding deinterleaver.
In this design, the information bits are encoded followed by
separate bit interleavers. The encoded bits are then separated
into MSBs and LSBs and former bits are encoded by (H−1 )T

2

for shaping. After shaping, the MSBs and LSBs, where the
merged and passed into the QAM mapper. At the receiver,
we calculate the log likelihood ratio (LLR) of each received
bit to enable soft decision decoding at the channel decoder.
By using this LLR sequence in the decoding process after
deinterleaving, one can decode the information. Different from
directly channel coded cases as in the conventional BICM,
the LLR calculation is somewhat complex in our model since
the MSBs are generated by shaping after channel coding. In
the following subsections, we detail our proposed calculation
process.
For reference, we also consider the channel coding without
bit interleaving, which corresponds to the system where the
interleavers and deinterleavers are simply removed from those
in Fig. 2.

B. BCJR Algorithm

A. Soft Output Calculation from Trellis Shaped Signals

αi (l) =

For the input s0 , we deﬁne the corresponding two-bit output
i
from the encoder for trellis shaping, current state
l = 0, 1, · · · , Ns − 1 of decoding trellis, where Ns denotes
the number of states of the trellis. In the BCJR algorithm, we
need to compute the forward recursion αi (l), the backward
b
recursion βi (l), and the branch metric γi (l , l), prior to calcu1
0
lating the actual soft output. Note that, ri and ri denote the
ﬁrst and second bit of the ith subcarrier, respectively.
b
First, we calculate γi (l , l) as

0 1
[ri , ri ]

r0

r1

b
i
i
γi (l , l) = µi,0 µi,1 , for b = 0, 1,

(4)

where b denotes the value of s0 ∈ {0, 1}. Next, we compute
i
αi (l) and βi (l) by the following recursive equations:
Ns −1
∑

∑

b
αi−1 (l )γi−1 (l , l), for i = 1, 2, · · · , N,

l =0 b∈{0,1}

With trellis shaping, hard decision is generally used for
MSBs since the soft output may not be directly retrieved. We
thus obtain the soft output of MSBs to improve the decoding
performance by employing the BCJR algorithm [13]. We ﬁrst
model the received OFDM symbol as follows. Let Yi denote
the ith subcarrier of the received signal, which can be written
as Yi = Hi Xi + Ni where Hi is the complex fading channel
coefﬁcient, Xi ∈ X is the transmitted symbol, and Ni is the
Gaussian noise term of the corresponding subcarrier. Note that
X is the set of M -QAM symbols to be transmitted and we
denote B = log2 M as the number of bits constituting the
symbol. With these notations, the bit likelihood for the jth bit
of the ith subcarrier, µb , where j ∈ {0, 1, · · · , B −1} and i ∈
i,j
{0, 1, · · · , N − 1}, is expressed by the a posteriori probability
that indicates which bit (b ∈ {0, 1}) was transmitted:
(
)
∑
|Yi − X|2
b
µi,j =
C exp −
(for AWGN channel)
N0
b
X∈Xj
(
)
∑
|Yi − Hi X|2
µb =
C exp −
(for fading channel),
i,j
N0
b

βi (l) =

Ns −1
∑

∑

b
βi+1 (l )γi (l , l), for i = N − 1, · · · , 1, 0,

l =0 b∈{0,1}

(5)
where we set the initial values of these parameter beforehand
as
{
1, for l = 0,
α0 (l) =
(6)
0, otherwise,
1
βN (l) =
, for l = 0, 1, · · · , Ns − 1.
(7)
Ns
Then we calculate the ith soft output Λb from MSB for each
i
bit b ∈ {0, 1} as follows:
Λb
(B−1)i =

Ns −1
∑

b
αi (l )γi (l , l)βi+1 (l),

l=0

for i = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1.

(8)

For the LSBs, the soft output is directly expressed by µb as
i
Λb (B−1)i+j = µb
iB+j+1 ,

X∈Xj

(3)

for i = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1, j = 1, 2, · · · , B − 2.

where
denotes the signal set whose jth bit is b ∈ {0, 1},
and C is a normalization constant which can be dropped in the
actual implementation. Also, N0 denotes the power spectral
density of AWGN.
To enable soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoding at the
receiver, we ﬁrst determine the trellis based on the compound
matrix [14] of (H−1 )T and G, and then employ a BCJR algorithm to it. For simplicity, we adopt the sign bit shaping and the
entire codeword of TS is matched to an OFDM symbol. In this
case, one bit out of B −1 bits is encoded by (H−1 )T , and each
subcarrier contains the corresponding two-bit outputs as MSB.
We denote the coded bits (prior to trellis shaping) carried by
the ith subcarrier as si = [s0 s1 · · · sB−2 ], and subsequently
i i
i
the corresponding binary sequence that forms the MSB of TS
by s = [s0 s0 · · · s0 −1 ].
0 1
N

Finally, we can obtain the log-likelihood ratio as
( 0)
Λi
, for i = 0, 1, · · · , (B − 1)N − 1.
Li = log
Λ1
i

Xjb

(9)

(10)

IV. S IMULATION R ESULTS
In this section, we evaluate frame error rate (FER) performance of the proposed system by computer simulation.
Throughout simulations, we consider the sign-bit shaping
described in [4, 8] for simplicity. The number of subcarriers
is chosen as 128, and each subcarrier is modulated by 256QAM constellation with either the Type-1 or Type-2 mapping.
As concatenated error correcting codes, we used a rate-6/7
LDPC code and the same rate punctured convolutional code
(CC). We set both the length of codeword of error correcting
codes and the size of interleaver to 896(= 128 × 7) bits to

3

Fig. 3. CCDFs of normalized instantaneous power with 256-QAM-modulated
˜
OFDM signal (N = 128) using 4-state TS with ∆ = 1/2 for Type-1 and
Type-2 mapping.

Fig. 4. FERs of the coded and trellis shaped 256-QAM-modulated 128˜
subcarrier OFDM system using 4-state TS (∆ = 1/2) with the Type-1
mapping over the AWGN channel.

match one OFDM symbol. In LDPC decoding, the maximum
iteration count is set to 50. The constraint length is chosen
as 3 for TS, and 7 for the convolutional code used for error
correction. Note that, these codes are selected from those with
maximum free distance. For complexity reduction, we apply
the trellis window truncation [8] with the normalized window
˜
size ∆ = 1/2 to the TS. From the above description, the
total coding rate of concatenated shaping system is calculated
as 3/4 for both LDPC code and CC concatenated case. For
comparison, we also show the performance of a rate-3/4
LDPC code without shaping. The codeword length of this
code is 1024 bits and the maximum iteration count is 50.
These parameters are chosen such that the overall bandwidth
efﬁciency is the same (i.e., 6 bits per symbol).
A. Peak Power Reduction Capability of TS

Fig. 5. FERs of the coded and trellis shaped 256-QAM-modulated 128˜
subcarrier OFDM system using 4-state TS (∆ = 1/2) with the Type-2
mapping over the AWGN channel.

Before we present the FER performance, we brieﬂy demonstrate the peak power reduction capabilities of TS. As a
criterion for evaluating the peak-power reducing effect, we use
the complementary cumulative distributed function (CCDF)
of the instantaneous power of these signals. Figure 3 shows
the CCDFs of normalized instantaneous power, for each of
Type-1 and Type-2 mapping. From this ﬁgure, it is observed
that we can considerably reduce the peak power compared
to the unshaped case. Comparing Type-1 and Type-2, the
former mapping can perform better, but the latter mapping
can reduce the average power by about 3 dB compared to
the unshaped case, while Type-1 has no capability of average
power reduction [8, 12].

at 10−3 is achieved by the concatenation of CC and LDPC
codes, respectively, compared to those without channel coding.
Moreover, for the case of LDPC concatenated shaping, the
improving effect of random interleaver can be observed. We
conjecture the reason for this behavior as follows: the builtin interleaver of LDPC code may not be sufﬁcient and some
check nodes thus refer to the LLR associated with TS in a
non-uniform manner, based on the fact that the interleaver
does not improve but rather degrades the performance of the
LDPC code without shaping.

B. FER Performance over an AWGN Channel

C. FER Performance over Rayleigh Fading Channel

Figures 4 and 5 show the FER performance of the proposed
system with Type-1 and Type-2 mappings, respectively, over
an AWGN channel. In both mappings, it is observed that
TS with channel coding can achieve better performance. We
observe that a gain in terms of Eb /N0 of about 2 dB and 5 dB

The FER performance over frequency-selective 4-path
Rayleigh fading channel is shown in Figs. 6 and 7 for
Type-1 and Type-2 mapping, respectively. For the simulated
frequency-selective channel, a guard interval (GI) of length
T /4 is inserted per OFDM symbol, where T is the OFDM

4

been shown that the use of LDPC codes for channel coding
considerably outperforms the uncoded as well as CC-coded
TS cases in both of AWGN and frequency-selective Rayleigh
fading channels.
For our future work, we will make further investigations on
the performance of coded trellis shaping over the nonlinear
channels.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by MEXT KAKENHI
23686058.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Li and L. J. Cimini, Jr., “Effects of clipping and ﬁltering on the
performance of OFDM,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 131–
133, May 1998.
[2] H. Ochiai and H. Imai, “Performance analysis of deliberately clipped
clipped OFDM signals,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 89–
101, January 2002.
[3] R. W. B¨ uml, R. F. H. Fischer, and J. B. Huber, “Reducing the peak-toa
average power ratio of multicarrier modulation by selected mapping,”
Electronics Letters., vol. 32, no. 22, pp. 2056–2057, October 1996.
[4] G. D. Forney, Jr. “Trellis Shaping,”IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 38,
pp. 281–300, March 1992.
[5] I. S. Morrison, “Trellis shaping applied to reducing the envelope
ﬂuctuation of MQAM and band-limited MPSK,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Digital Satellite Commun. (ICDSC’92), pp. 143–149, May 1992.
[6] M. Tanahashi and H. Ochiai, “Near constant envelope trellis shaping
for PSK signaling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 450–458,
February 2009.
[7] W. Henkel and B. Wagner, “Another application for trellis shaping: PAR
reduction for DMT(OFDM),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 11,
pp. 1471–1476, September 2000.
[8] H. Ochiai, “A novel trellis-shaping design with both peak and average
power reduction for OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52,
no. 11, pp. 1916–1926, November 2004.
[9] T. T. Nguyen and L. Lampe, “On trellis shaping for PAR reduction in
OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1678–1682,
September 2007.
[10] E. Zehavi, “8-PSK trellis codes for a Rayleigh channel,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 873–884, May 1992.
[11] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Inform. Theory., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[12] R. Yoshizawa and H. Ochiai, “Performance Comparison of TrellisShaped OFDM Systems over Nonlinear Channels,” Proceedings of 20th
International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC 2011)., France, Brest, October 2011.
[13] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of
linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284-287, March 1974.
[14] T. Aoki, H. Ochiai, and R. Kohno, “Combined trellis precoding and error
correcting codes in multi-user MIMO-OFDM systems,” IEICE Trans.
Fund., vol. E93-A, no. 12, pp. 2663-2671, December 2010.

Fig. 6. FERs of the coded and trellis shaped 256-QAM-modulated 128˜
subcarrier OFDM system using 4-state TS (∆ = 1/2) with the Type-1
mapping over the frequency selective fading channel.

Fig. 7. FERs of the coded and trellis shaped 256-QAM-modulated 128˜
subcarrier OFDM system using 4-state TS (∆ = 1/2) with the Type-2
mapping over the frequency selective fading channel.

symbol length, and the delay spread is set shorter than the
length of the GI. We also assume that the receiver has an ideal
channel state information (CSI) and uses this information at
the channel decoder to retrieve the original information bits
correctly. Even though the performance over fading channels
degrades in general, a similar tendency to the case of AWGN
channel is observed. In particular, considerable performance
gain can be achieved by channel coding compared to the
uncoded case because of the effect of frequency diversity.
Moreover, in this channel, a bit interleaving always improves
the performance for coded cases.
V. C ONCLUSION
We have investigated the FER performance of coded trellis
shaping over AWGN and frequency-selective Rayleigh fading
channels with and without bit interleaving. We have proposed
a novel serial concatenation structure in this study and it has

5

