Title:          pc_vfinal.pdf
Author:         ALM
Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.18:2302
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 23:03:41 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:32 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      595.22 x 842 pts (A4)
File size:      306266 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569565897

Power Optimization on a Network:
The effects of randomness
Aris L. Moustakas1

Nicholas Bambos

Physics Dept., Univ. of Athens, 157 84 Athens, Greece
Email: arislm@phys.uoa.gr

Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305
Email: bambos@stanford.edu

Abstract—Consider a wireless network of transmitter-receiver
pairs. The transmitters adjust their powers to maintain a
particular SINR target at the corresponding receiver in the
presence of interference from neighboring transmitters. In this
paper we analyze the optimal power vector that achieves this
target in the presence of randomness in the network. Speciﬁcally,
starting from a regular lattice of transmitter-receiver pairs we
randomly turn off a ﬁnite fraction of them. We apply random
matrix theory to evaluate the asymptotic optimal power per
link, as well as the variance of powers in the optimal power
vector in the limit of a large number of links. Our analytical
results show remarkable agreement with numerically generated
networks, both in one- and two-dimensional network geometries.
Interestingly, we observe that unlike regular lattices, the optimal
power in random networks has a discontinuity at a ﬁnite value,
while the variance of its powers diverges at that value. Beyond
that critical point, no feasible power solution exists. We discuss
the relevance of these results in realistic networks.

However, the interference from neighboring transmitters is
only taken into account by considering them as an effective
medium without any feedback taken into account. Hence, the
effects of the increase of power in a given link to other
neighboring links, which also control their power in order to
maintain a target SINR, are neglected. A similar approach is
taken by [8] who introduce a scheme to compensate partially
for the fading coefﬁcient of the direct link between transmitter
and receiver, without addressing the effects on neighboring
links. These effects were partially included in the context
of percolating networks in [9]. Here however, the network
is initially assumed to be percolating with all transmitters
utilizing their maximum power and then the powers are
reduced while keeping their connectivity. Thus the optimal
power is obtained only for the links that are already connected
without any guarantees to others.
The effect of interference is already a problem in dense
WiFi networks and is expected to become an issue in the
context of femto-cells, a recently proposed network paradigm,
when they become massively deployed: due to their close
proximity, neighboring femto-cells may create interference to
one another [10]. Hence, when each transmitter increases its
power in order to compensate for this interference, it may
create domino effect of power increases, which needs to be
addressed. As a result, all above situations are expected to
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from power optimization. Nevertheless,
little progress has been made in ﬁnding analytic estimates
of the performance of random, interference-limited networks
when power control is applied [11].
In this paper we apply tools from random matrix theory,
[12], [13] providing an analytic estimate of the optimal power
performance for a large network in the presence of both interference and randomness. We start from an ordered network
structure, in particular an equally spaced line (or square) of N
transmitters, each with a receiver located in its neighborhood at
a ﬁxed distance. Then we introduce randomness in the network
by removing each transmitter-receiver pair with probability
e. As a result, a network with roughly N (1 − e) transceiver
pairs will remain, randomly located in the original lattice. This
thinned network is a model for a realistic cellular network,
which usually tries to mimic a (usually hexagonal) symmetric
network. It is also a good model for a wireless network
with intermittent activity, such that at any time a fraction
e of the total transmitters are inactive. Although relatively

I. I NTRODUCTION
Transmitted power is an important resource in wireless networks and therefore power control has been crucial since the
development of legacy networks. For example, the introduction
of efﬁcient power control algorithms (both closed loop and
open loop), was one of the main improvements third generation CDMA-based cellular networks brought about. Several
algorithms been developed that provably allow receivers to
obtain e.g. a minimum SINR requirement SINRk ≥ γk
for link k while minimizing the total power or the power
per user, subject to the feasibility of this solution [1], [2].
Importantly, power optimization remains an relevant problem
in emerging and future networks. Ad hoc networks are one
such class of networks, where substantial effort has been made
to analyze their behavior, through metrics such as connectivity
and transport capacity [3]–[6].
A number of works have discussed the feasibility conditions
of the optimal power vector [5], [7] under general assumptions,
without however addressing speciﬁc gains from power control.
In contrast, [6] using the Laplace transform method, has
calculated the effects of fading, pathloss and random erasures
on the interference to a random receiver in both regular and
Poisson random networks. In addition, they analyze the effects
of power-control by inverting the pathloss and/or the fading
coefﬁcient of the direct link of a given transmitter and receiver.
1 This work was funded by the research program ‘CROWN’, through the
Operational Program ‘Education and Lifelong Learning 2007-2013’ of NSRF,
which has been co-ﬁnanced by EU and Greek national funds.

1

behavior for mi = mj as well as for |mi − mj |
δ. 1 The
reason we chose to use this model will become apparent later.

straightforward, this paradigm carries all the traits of a random
network and, as we shall see, behaves qualitatively differently
from ordered networks. Also, surprisingly these results are
valid for both one-dimensional and two-dimensional networks.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
deﬁne the network model in the absence of any randomness.
In Section III we describe the network with erasures of
transmitter-receiver pairs and calculate the average minimum
power per receiver as well as its variance using results from
random matrix theory. In Section IV we discuss the relevance
of these results in both one- and two-dimensional geometries.
Finally, in Section V we draw some conclusions, while in the
appendix we provide some details of the proofs.

į
Ɛ

II. M ODEL D ESCRIPTION
Assume a network of N transmitters on a lattice. The lattice
may be one-dimensional with equal spacing between them,
or two-dimensional (see Fig. 1). In the latter case, which is
obviously the more realistic one, it may have any symmetry,
e.g. hexagonal or triangular, but for concreteness, we will
assume that the lattice is square. Each transmitter is connected
via a link to a single receiver located at a distance δ from
its corresponding transmitter. The channel coefﬁcient between
transmitter i and receiver j and averaged over the fading is
given by
δα
gij =
(1)
(|mi − mj |2 2 + δ 2 )α/2

Fig. 1. Schematic ﬁgure of wireless network. The circles correspond to
transmitters, while the squares receiver users. The opaque squares represent
transmitter-receiver pairs that have been “erased” and are thus considered
inactive.

The receivers now connect with their own nearby cells. The
SINR for each connection is given by
pk gkk
SINRk =
(3)
n + j=k gjk pj
where pk is the transmitted power from the k transmitter to
the receiver k and n is the thermal noise, assumed equal for all
for simplicity. For the connection to be possible, a minimum
value of the SINR has to be attainable i.e.

where mi is the lattice vector of integers corresponding to
transmitter i. For simplicity, we have normalized the channel
gains to unity for i = j. It is also convenient to deﬁne s = δ/ .
For d-dimensional lattices (d = 1, 2), mi can be expressed in
terms of integer linear combinations of the d basis-vectors k
of the lattice

SINRk ≥ γ

Therefore, each transmitter should adjust its own power to
meet this criterion. As a result, the following set of equations
should be simultaneously met

d

mi =

mia

a

(4)

(2)

n−1 γ −1 gkk pk −

a=1

n−1 gjk pj ≥ 1

(5)

j=k

for integer 0 ≤ mia < L, where N = Ld . Since the integers
mia fully specify the position mi , we will drop the index
i when not necessary. For simplicity we assume periodic
boundary conditions on the lattice, hence ma ≡ ma + L. This
means that the distance between any two points is taken as
their minimum distance on a toroidal geometry (or a circular
geometry for one dimension). It should be emphasized that the
effects of this circulant property for the matrix with elements
gij will become negligible for large N . Also, α ≥ 2 is
the pathloss exponent, which signiﬁes how fast the channel
strength decays as a function of distance.
The pathloss function above is somewhat artiﬁcial in its dependence on the distances between the receiver and transmitter. Technically, it is strictly correct only when each receiver is
located vertically to the line connecting all transmitters (as in
any horizontal line of Fig. 1), which is one possible geometry
for one dimensional systems [7]. Nevertheless, it has the right

The above equations constitute a set of linear (planar) constraints on the powers. The minimum total power is reached
at the apex of the conical section of allowed powers, given by
equality of all constraints above. Deﬁning the matrix M with
elements Mij as
Mij =

n−1 γ −1 gii
−n−1 gji

i=j
i=j

(6)

we may write the above equation as
P = M−1 J

(7)

where P is the vector of powers that satisﬁes the equality
constraint above and J = [1, 1, . . . , 1]T . As a result, the
1 In fact, we believe the accuracy of this approximation is better than that
of a pathloss exponent α > 2 as a free variable, whose value comes out of
curve ﬁtting of large amounts of data with sizable errors [14].

2

The corresponding equation for the power vector becomes

minimum average power is given by
pave =

1 T −1
J M J
N

EMEP = EJ

(8)

where we have erased the corresponding entries from J on the
left-hand-side by multiplying with E. Now, simply inverting
the matrix Me is problematic, since it has approximately N e
zero columns and rows and corresponding zero eigenvalues.
Instead, we regularize the matrix by adding a small positive
constant on the diagonal, namely

Clearly, for pave to be well-deﬁned, all the eigenvalues of M
have to be positive.
Now, due to the circulant structure of M, its eigenvectors
will be Fourier modes indexed by the vector q which resides
in the fundamental cell of the reciprocal lattice of the lattice
m with basis vectors ˆa
2π
q=
L

P = [EME + I]

d

ka ˆa

(9)

with −1/2 < ka ≥ 1/2 [15]. The eigenvalue corresponding
to the vector q is simply the Fourier transform of any line of
the matrix M given by
λ(q)

=

M0,m eiq
m

=

⎛

n−1 ⎝γ −1 −

pave =

m

T

(16)

dq

β
(2π) β + λ(q)
d

(17)

where λ(q) is the q eigenvalue of the matrix M (10) and the
integral is over the fundamental cell of the reciprocal lattice
of the system. Then when N → +∞ the average power per
transmitter converges almost surely to
pave =

(11)

1
1
1 − e β + λ0

(18)

Remark 1.1. In the appendix the above theorem is proved
for one-dimensional lattices. We will conjecture that this is
valid for two-dimensional lattices and for all feasible γ through
simulations and defer the complete proof for a longer version
of the work.

The above equations are valid in the absence of erasures
of transmitters. Realistically, erasures may occur in two ways.
First, the transmitter in a particular location may be absent.
Therefore, no mobile is expected to receive any data in that
cell. Second, when the buffer to a particular receiver may be
empty for a period of time. Hence the corresponding transmitter will be silent. In principle, it may still be transmitting
a pilot signal, in which case the required SINR will be much
smaller. For simplicity, we will assume that the connection to
its cell-receiver(s) will be off. As a result, for every transmitterreceiver pair that is “off” we need to set both its column and
row elements to zero. Since this pair is chosen at random, we
need to set each column-row pair to zero with probability e.
This can be done by modifying the matrix to

It is easy to see that the above result reduces to pave = 1/λ0
in the limit that e → 0. Indeed, when λ0 > 0, the right-handside of (17) is zero only when β = 0. Similarly, for e → 1
the average power takes its non-interference value
pave = γn

(19)

In the presence of erasures, the maximum SINR target that
is supported in the system is reduced to
γe =

γ
1 + nβe γ

(20)

where βe is the solution of (17) and γ is given by the equality
of (11).
In addition to the mean power, we can also obtain the
variance of the powers in the network given by

(12)

where E is a diagonal random matrix with independent
diagonal entries ei on the ith entry, with
P [ei = 0] = e
P [ei = 1] = 1 − e

1 †
1
−1
lim
J E [EME + I] EJ
1 − e →0+ N

e=

III. R ANDOMLY T HINNED N ETWORK

Me = EME

(15)

Theorem 1 (Average Minimum Power). Let β be the solution
of the equation

(10)

It is important to note that these eigenvalues are real because
the matrix M is real and symmetric, which is the reason for
choosing (1). Finally, since the vector J is proportional to the
q = 0 eigenvector of M we conclude that pave = λ−1 where
0
λ0 = λ(q = 0). This solution corresponds to all transmitters
transmitting with the same power. The condition for ﬁnite total
power in the case of no erasures is simply
δα
γ
<1
2 2 + δ 2 )α/2
(|m|
m=0

EJ

Our main technical result can then be stated as follows:

⎞

sα eiq m ⎠
(|m|2 + s2 )α/2
m=0

−1

To obtain the average power as before we multiply on the left
with J† E to collect all the components with non-zero power.
Thus we have

a=1

T

(14)

V ar(P) =

(13)

3

1
N (1 − e)

(pi − pave )2
i

(21)

Theorem 2 (Variance of Minimum Power). The variance of
the powers of the individual transmitters in the network is
given by
1
1
1 − e (β + λ0 )2

e=0

e = 0.3
e = 0.5

1

dq
β
(2π)d (β+λ(q))2
λ(q)
dq
(2π)d (β+λ(q))2

10

(22)
Pave

V ar(P) =

Pave vs γ; 2dim; s=0.5; PL=5

2

10

The proof is deferred for the appendix.
IV. A NALYSIS

0

10

e = 0.7

−1

10

We start by analyzing the results for the simpler onedimensional case, where the transmitters are located in a ring.
The numerical results are plotted in Fig. 2. There we see,
both analytically and numerically, that the average power is
ﬁnite for a range of γ above the value for which λ0 = 0,
which is the value of γ for which the e = 0 solution diverges.
Interestingly, when γ is such that λ0 < 0 a second solution to
the ﬁxed point equation appears (plotted, for the case of α = 4
in Fig. 2 as dashed line for e = 0.7)). This second solution of
pave is an artifact of the solution and persists until it merges
with the physical value at a critical value of γ. At that point
the variance of the average power vector diverges (see dotted
line in 2). Beyond this point no ﬁnite average power can be
supported for the given value of e. We thus see a discontinuous
transition at that point, from a ﬁnite average minimum power
to an inﬁnite (infeasible) value. This, combined with the fact
the variance of the power vector diverges at this point, suggests
that either a ﬁnite number of transmitter powers diverge, or that
there is a heavy tail in the distribution of transmitter powers
in the optimal power vector.

P

th

P

num max

P

4

10

e=0

3

(1−e)pave

2

10

1

10

e=0.1
e=0.7

0

10

e=0.5
Analytic
Numerical
Unphysical Solution
Variance(P)

e=0.3

−1

10

−2

10

0

2

4

6

8

γ

10

12

14

2

4

6

8

10

γ

12

14

16

18

20

inﬁnite varies somewhat from sample to sample (as well as
the whole curve beyond the value where λ0 = 0). As we shall
show in the appendix, the end point of this curve has to do
with the largest eigenvalue of the matrix EME. For ﬁnite
but large N it is known for similar random matrix systems
[16] that although the eigenvalues of the matrix converge fast
to their asymptotic spectrum, the largest eigenvalue ﬂuctuates
much more outside the support of the asymptotic spectrum.
Hence, while the theoretical curve seems to be the upper
limit, beyond which no ﬁnite power can be supported, this
ﬁnite size behavior, which can be seen in the numerically
obtained curves in Fig. 2 seems to be due to the ﬂuctuations
of the largest eigenvalue. How can we explain this behavior?
Presumably, if a region happens to have a large concentration
of transmitters it may create a situation where the power of a
particular transmitter diverges.
It is remarkable that these results also hold for twodimensional lattices, even though we have not provided a proof
in this short paper version. This can be seen in Fig. 3. We once
again observe the same behavior as in the one-dimensional
case.

10

10

0

Fig. 3. Plot of average power as a function of the target SINR for various
values e for a two-dimensional 50 × 50-sized lattice of transmitter-receiver
pairs. The path-loss exponent is α = 5, while n = 1. The curves have the
same meaning as in the previous ﬁgure. In addition to the analytically obtained
curves we plot curves obtained from 500 random realizations of the lattice.
The dashed curve (denoted num max) corresponds to the realization, which
has remained feasible over the largest interval of γ, while the starred curve
(denoted num mean) is an average over all realizations up to the point where
the value of γ, where at least one simulated realization becomes infeasible.

Pave vs target SINR; 1dimension PLexp=4; noise=1; s=0.5

5

num mean

−2

10

16

V. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 2. Plot of average power for a one-dimensional chain of transmitters
as a function of the target SINR for various values of e. The solid curves are
analytically obtained, while the starred curves are numerically generated with
103 independent realizations and correspond to the realizations which have
remained feasible the longest possible. The dashed and dotted lines correspond
to the unphysical solution of (17) and the variance of the power feasible vector
in (22) for e = 0.7, respectively. The path-loss exponent is set to α = 4,
while the noise level n = 1 and the ratio s = δ/ = 0.5

In this paper we have studied the optimal power vector
that achieves an SINR target criterion in a wireless network
setting where both randomness and interference are relevant.
We have applied methods from Random Matrix Theory to
obtain the average optimum power and its variance. Our
numerical results show remarkable agreement with predicted
analytical calculations, both for one- and two-dimensional
network geometries. These metrics can provide an indication
for the power requirements such a network would have. We

Another interesting result from the numerical analysis is that
beyond the value of γ where λ0 = 0 the behavior becomes
sample dependent. Thus the value at which the power becomes

4

also observe that in the presence of randomness the optimal
power does not go to inﬁnity in a continuous fashion. Rather,
a discontinuity occurs at a certain point, beyond which no
ﬁnite power solution exists. At the same time, the variance of
the power vector diverges at that point, suggesting that only
a small minority of transmitting powers becomes unbounded.
As a result, accepting the loss of these connections, which
would only result to a small outage in the connectivity, would
signiﬁcantly improve the network performance.

asymptotically free [13]. Then, deﬁning the Cauchy transform
as
e η(−z −1 )
F (z) = −
(28)
z
z
where η is the η transform of the matrix [17]. Taking advantage
of the above-mentioned asymptotic freedom [13], [17] we can
show that
e/F (z)
dq
e=
(29)
(2π)d λ(q) − z + e/F (z)

A PPENDIX A
P ROOF OF T HEOREMS 1 AND 2

Indeed, identifying e/F (0) as β we see that if z = 0 is not part
of the asymptotic spectrum, β has a real solution in the above
equation, which coincides with (17). On the other hand, when
z = 0 is inside the support of the spectrum, β will also have
an imaginary part. At the edge of the spectrum the condition
ImF (zedge ) = 0 implies

Both proofs will be assume one-dimensional networks. The
case of d = 2 is deferred to a longer publication.
Proof of Theorem 1: We start by deﬁning the matrix
A = EF, where F is the Fourier matrix that diagonalizes
M = F† ΛF and denote its column vectors by aq and, in
particular, a0 = N −1/2 EJ. As a result, (16) may be rewritten
as
−1
a† λ0 a0 a† + AΛ0 A† + I
a0
(23)
0
0

dq
λ(q) − z
=0
(2π)d (λ(q) − z + β)2
R EFERENCES

[1] G. J. Foschini and Z. Miljanic, “A simple distributed autonomous power
control algorithm and its convergence,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 40, pp. 641–646, 1991.
[2] N. Bambos, S. C. Chen, and G. J. Pottie, “Channel access algorithms
with active link protection for wireless communication networks with
power control,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 583–587,
Oct. 2000.
[3] M. Franceschetti and R. Meester, Random Networks for Communication:
From Statistical Physics to Information Systems.
Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[4] F. Baccelli and B. Blaszczyszyn, “Stochastic geometry and wireless
networks: Theory,” Foundations and Trends in Networking, vol. 3, no.
3-4, pp. 249–449, 2009.
[5] ——, “Stochastic geometry and wireless networks: Applications,” Foundations and Trends in Networking, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 1–312, 2009.
[6] M. Krunz, A. Muqattash, and S.-J. Lee, “Transmission power control
in wireless ad hoc networks: Challenges, solutions, and open issues,”
IEEE Network, vol. 18, p. 8, Sep. 2004.
[7] F. Baccelli, N. Bambos, and C. Chan, “Optimal power, throughput
and routing for wireless link arrays,” in Proceedings IEEE Infocom,
Barcelona, Spain, April 2006, pp. 1–12.
[8] N. Jindal, S. Weber, and J. G. Andrews, “Fractional power control for
decentralized wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7,
no. 12, pp. 5482–5492, Dec 2008.
[9] G. S. Paschos, P. Mannersalo, and S. Stanczak, “Extending the percolation threshold using power control,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC, 2009.
[10] V. Chandrasekhar, J. Andrews, and A. Gatherer, “Femtocell networks:
a survey,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 59 –67,
September 2008.
[11] M. Chiang et al., Power control in wireless cellular networks, ser.
Foundations and Trends in Networking. Hanover, MA 02339: now
Publishers Inc., 2007, vol. 2, no. 4.
[12] A. M. Tulino et al., “Capacity of the gaussian erasure channel,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, June 2007, pp. 1721–1725.
[13] ——, “Capacity of channels with frequency-selective and time-selective
fading,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 56, no. 3, p. 1187, Mar. 2010.
[14] L. M. Correia, Ed., Wireless Flexible Personalised Communications;
COST 259: European Co-operation in Mobile Radio Research. Chichester, UK: J. Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[15] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, F. Laloe, and B. Diu, Quantum Mechanics. New
York: John Wiley and Sons, 1977.
[16] S. N. Majumdar, Random Matrices, the Ulam Problem, Directed Polymers & Growth Models, and Sequence Matching, ser. Les Houches,
M. M´ zard and J. P. Bouchaud, Eds. Elsevier, July 2006, vol. Complex
e
Systems.
[17] A. M. Tulino and S. Verd´ , “Random matrix theory and wireless commuu
nications,” Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information
Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–182, 2004.

where Λ0 is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues of M with
the one corresponding to q = 0 (i.e. λ0 ) set to zero. After the
application of the matrix inversion lemma we obtain
pave =
where

1
1
lim
1 − e →0+ β( ) + λ0

β( )−1 = a† AΛ0 A† + I
0

−1

(24)
a0

(25)

In [13] it is shown that the above quantity takes (a.s.) a
deterministic value in the large N limit, which is the solution
of the following equation
e
1 − β(

=
)

β( )
β( ) + λ(q)
(2π)
dq

d

(26)

Taking the limit → 0+ in the above and setting β(0) = β
concludes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 2: We start by noting that the normalized second moment of the power vector P is given by
P† P
N

=
=
=

(30)

1
−2
(27)
lim a† [EME + I] a0
1 − e →0+ 0
1
∂ †
−2
−
lim
a [EME + I] a0
1 − e →0+ ∂ 0
1
β( )
lim
1 − e →0+ (β( ) + λ0 )2

where β ( ), the derivative of β( ) with respect to can be
evaluated directly from (26). Subtracting off p2 concludes
ave
the proof.
It is interesting to point out that the condition that the
denominator in (22) vanishes, which signiﬁes the end of the
feasibility of a solution, is equivalent to the largest edge of the
asymptotic spectrum of the matrix EME becoming zero and
hence the point when β can no longer admit a real solution.
To show this we start from the fact that Λ and FEF† are

5

