Title:          KernelDecen-isit12.dvi
Creator:        dvips(k) 5.99 Copyright 2010 Radical Eye Software
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 10:07:58 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:20 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      458122 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566311

Nonparametric Decentralized Detection Based on
Weighted Count Kernel
Jiayao Hu and Yingbin Liang

Eric P. Xing

Dept of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA
Email: {hjiayao,yliang06}@syr.edu

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15203 USA
epxing@cs.cmu.edu

correlated observations, in which the correlation is implicitly
embedded in training data and their inﬂuence on the decision
rules is automatically incorporated by optimizing empirical
risk functions determined by the training data. In our previous
work [9], we generalized the kernel-based approach in [8]
to tree-structured sensor networks, and proposed a distributed
protocol which achieves an efﬁcient implementation for ﬁnding the optimal decision rules over a tree structure.
In this paper, we study more realistic sensor networks,
which generalize the models studied in [8], [9] to include
several new features: (1) sensors’ observations can have different qualities and hence different alphabet sizes due to their
different locations in capturing the environmental event; (2)
the fusion center can receive observations of the environmental
event directly; (3) sensors’ transmissions to the fusion center
are subject to certain rate bit constraints and hence sensors’
quantization levels can be different; and (4) sensors may be
networked in a multilevel tree structure toward the fusion
center. Our goal is to characterize the impact of these practical
features on the decision rules of the fusion center and sensors
in the nonparametric decentralized detection.
Our study adopts the nonparametric kernel-based approach
proposed by Nguyen, Wainwright, and Jordan in [8] with
the following generalization. We introduce a weighted count
kernel so that the corresponding Hilbert space, i.e., the RKHS,
(over which the fusion center’s decision rule is optimized)
allows the fusion center’s decision rule to count information
from sensors and its own observations differently based on
the quality of these information sources. In this way, by
introducing the weight parameters in the weighted count
kernel into the risk minimization framework, the best RKHS
associated with the weighted count kernel is selected jointly
with the decision rules for the fusion center and sensors. Thus,
the impact of the network features including the quality of
sensors’ observations, fusion center’s direct observations, and
rate constraints on sensors’ transmissions are naturally incorporated into the fusion center’s decision rules via selecting the
RKHS that these decision rules lie in.
We solve the risk minimization for ﬁnding the decision rules
by recursively and alternatively conducting three optimization
steps: ﬁnding the optimal weight parameters for selecting
the best RKHS associated with the weighted count kernel,

Abstract—The nonparametric decentralized detection problem
is investigated, in which the joint distribution of the environmental event and the sensors’ observations are not known and only
a set of training samples are available. The system features rate
constraints, i.e., integer bit constraints on sensors’ transmissions,
different qualities of observations, additional observations to
the fusion center, and multi-level tree-structured network. Our
study adopts the kernel-based nonparametric approach proposed
by Nguyen, Wainwright, and Jordan with the following generalization. A weighted count kernel is introduced so that the
corresponding reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) (over
which the fusion center’s decision rule is optimized) allows
the fusion center’s decision rule to count information from
sensors and its own observations differently. In order to ﬁnd the
optimal decision rules, our optimization is solved by alternatively
and recursively conducting three optimization steps: ﬁnding the
optimal weight parameters in the weighted count kernel for
selecting the best associated RKHS, ﬁnding the best optimal
decision rule for the fusion center over the identiﬁed RKHS,
and ﬁnding the local decision rules for sensors. Generalization
to multilevel tree-structured networks is also discussed. Finally
numerical results are provided to demonstrate the performance
based on the proposed weighted count kernel.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As a classical decision-making problem, decentralized detection has been extensively studied in the literature, e.g.,
[1]–[3] and references therein. Most of previous work on
this topic used parametric approaches, which assumed the
joint distribution of the environmental event and the sensors’
observations is known in advance.
Nonparametric (de)centralized detection was studied previously in, e.g., [4], [5], which employed detectors that perform
well for certain statistical environments. A learning-based
nonparametric linear regression problem was studied in [6],
[7]. More recently, a kernel-based classiﬁcation approach was
proposed in [8], which is more generally applicable with
mathematical guarantee on the performance. The basic idea is
to introduce a kernel function that determines a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), over which the decision rule of
the fusion center is searched to optimize a given risk function.
It has been shown by numerical examples in [8] that the
kernel-based approach yields better performances than other
approaches based on estimating joint distributions. Furthermore, compared to parametric approaches, such a kernel-based
nonparametric approach is also applicable for the case with

1

ﬁnding the optimal decision rule for the fusion center over
the identiﬁed RKHS, and ﬁnding the local decision (i.e.,
quantization) rules for sensors. For each step, risk functions
are typically convex, but not differentiable everywhere. By
adopting the approach in [8] based on conjugate dual arguments, we analytically characterize the optimal decision rule
for the fusion center. We also characterize some components in
subdifferentials for optimizing weight parameters and decision
rules for sensors efﬁciently. We further discuss the generalization to multilevel tree-structured networks, in which the impact
of the network structure on the decision rules is also captured
by the selection of the optimal weighted count kernel.
We also derive an upper bound on the true risk function
based on the approximate empirical risk function, whose
asymptotic behavior suggests that additional optimization over
RKHSs associated with the weighted count kernel does not
require more training samples for the approximate empirical
risk function to be close to the true risk function from the
above. We ﬁnally provide numerical results to demonstrate
the impact of the rate constraints of sensors’ transmissions to
the fusion center and direct observations of the fusion center
on the detection error probability based on our weighted count
kernel approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section
II, we provide the necessary background on learning by
kernels. In section III, we describe our system model and
problem formulation. In section IV, we provide our main
results in ﬁnding the optimal decision rules. In section V,
we discuss about the generalization of our study to multilevel
tree-structured sensor networks. In section VI, we provide the
simulation results, and ﬁnally in section VII, we conclude our
paper with a few remarks.

Fig. 1.

where m is any positive integer, αi ∈ R, and x1 , · · · , xm ∈ X
are arbitrary. For this vector space, we deﬁne an inner product
between f and another function g(·) = m βj k(·, xj ) as
j=1
m

αi βj k(xi , xj ).
i=1 j=1

It can be shown that after completing this vector space, we
obtain a RKHS associated with the kernel k.
III. M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We study the decentralized detection problem over a sensor
network (see Fig. 1), in which sensors receive observations
about an environmental event, quantize their observations
based on their own local decision rules (i.e., quantization
rules), and then forward their quantized information to a fusion
center, which will make the decision about the state of the
environmental event. We use Y to denote the environmental
event, which can take binary values +1 and −1. We assume
there are S sensors in the network. We use X s ∈ X to
denote the observation received by sensor s for s = 1, . . . , S,
and use Z s to denote the quantized value of sensor s. The
sensor’s observation X s can have different alphabet sizes,
which may possibly due to nonuniform noise corruption of
signals received by these sensors.
The decision rule of a sensor can be characterized by a
probability distribution Qs s |X s (z s |xs ) mapping from its input
Z
variable X s to an output variable Z s , thus allowing a random
decision rule. In particular, we assume that there is a bit
constraint Rs (which is assumed to be an integer) on each
sensor’s transmission to the fusion center, and hence each
Z s has an alphabet size 2Rs . Consequently, Z s may also
have different alphabet size due to different rate constraints.
We also assume that the fusion center receives not only
quantized information from all sensors but also observations
directly from the environment denoted by X 0 , and hence the
fusion center’s decision rule can be written as a function
γ(Z 1 , . . . , Z S , X 0 ).
In our problem, we assume that the joint probability distribution of the event and the observations for all sensors and the
fusion center, i.e., P (Y, X 0 , . . . , X S ), is unknown. Instead,
a set of training data are available, i.e., (x0 , . . . , xS , yi ) for
i
i
i = 1, . . . , N . We adopt the framework of empirical risk minimization for decentralized detection in [8] to ﬁnd the jointly
optimal decision rule γ for the fusion center and decision rules

In this section, we introduce the basic concepts and deﬁnitions on learning by kernels, which is the basic technique that
we apply in this paper.
Deﬁnition 1. A function k on X 2 → R is called a kernel if
for all positive integer m and all x1 , · · · , xm ∈ X , the m × m
matrix K with elements Kij = k(xi , xj ) for i, j = 1, . . . , m
is positive semideﬁnite.
Deﬁnition 2. A Hilbert space H containing functions f : X →
R is called a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) if there
exists a kernel k : X × X → R with the following properties:
• k has the reproducing property:
f, k(x, ·) = f (x) for all f ∈ H,
in particular, k(x, ·), k(x , ·) = k(x, x ), and
k spans H.

Given a kernel k, we deﬁne a feature mapping Φ : x ∈
X → k(·, x), which maps an element x ∈ X to a function.
We then deﬁne a vector space containing
m

αi k(·, xi )

f (·) =

m

f, g =

II. BACKGROUND O N KERNELS

•

A sensor network for decentralized detection

i=1

2

Qs for all sensors that minimize a given risk function φ(·)
which is properly chosen as the system performance measure.
We consider decision rule for the fusion center that lies in
the RKHS H determined by a kernel function k(·, ·) : (Z ×
X )×(Z ×X ) → R. We note that the domain of the kernel has
one more space compared to that in [8] to take into account
the observations of the fusion center. As such, we can express
the fusion center’s decision rule as:
γ(z, x0 ) = w, Φ(z, x0 )

Remark 1. Although our study focuses on the weighted count
kernel, the idea of introducing weights to kernels for counting
information differently may be applicable for more general
types of kernels.
By introducing the optimization of the weight parameters
into the risk minimization problem, our optimization problem
now becomes:
λ
w 2 β (4)
φ(yi w, Φβ (xi , x0 ) Hβ ) +
min
i
H
S+1
2
β∈R
,w∈Hβ ,Q∈Q

H

βs ≥0 for s=0,1,...,S

where w ∈ H, z = (z 1 , . . . , z S ) and Φ(z, x0 ) = k(·, (z, x0 )).
Our problem is then formulated as the following optimization problem:
N

min

w∈H,Q∈Q

z

φ(yi w, Φ(z, x0 )
i

H )Q(z|xi )+

i=1

λ
w
2

2
H

where Φβ (xi , x0 ) = z Φβ (z, x0 )Q(z|xi ).
i
i
We note that without loss of generality, we set one dimension of βs to be ﬁxed as a reference value. Due to
possibly large number of training samples and sensors, dimensions of the parameters to be optimized can be very
large. Hence, optimizing over all parameters simultaneously
is very complex. Furthermore, the risk function φ(·) such as
the hinge loss function is not differentiable everywhere, which
adds more complexity to the problem. Thus, we adopt the
coordinate gradient algorithm to recursively and alternatively
optimize over these three types of parameters, i.e., β, w and
Q. This approach is justiﬁed because the objective function is
convex over any type of parameter given two other types of
parameters.

(1)

where xi = (x1 , . . . , xS ) and Q is the set which includes all
i
i
possible conditional probabilities for every sensor. In particus
lar, Q(z|xi ) can be decomposed as Q(z|xi ) = i=1 Q(z s |xs ),
because sensors follow independent decision rules.
Since it is computationally complex to solve the above
optimization problem in general. Similarly to [8], by applying
Jensen’s inequality, we obtain a lower bound for (1) as a
relaxation.
λ
w 2
(2)
min φ(yi w, Φ (xi , x0 ) H ) +
i
H
w∈H,Q∈Q
2

A. Optimization over β

0
where Φ (xi , x0 ) =
i
z Φ(z, xi )Q(z|xi ) ∈ H. It can be
shown that the approximate empirical risk function approaches
to the true risk function from the above as the number of
training data becomes large as in Section IV-D.

We optimize the objective function over the weight parameters βs , s = 0, 1, . . . , S one after another with w and all Q(·|·)s
ﬁxed. Since risk functions are typically nondifferentiable everywhere (e.g. the hinge loss function we use for our numerical
simulation), we characterize an analytical expression for an
element in the subdifferential of the objective function with
respect to each component βs in order for implementing the
gradient algorithm, which can be complex otherwise.

IV. M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we introduce a weighted count kernel, which
thus deﬁnes a Hilbert space of the RKHS that enables to count
contributions from sensors differently based on quality of
observations, transmission constraints, additional observations
of the fusion center, and the impact network structure for
designing decision rules of the fusion center and sensors. We
then optimize the risk function over the weight parameters
in the weighted count kernel in order to select the optimal
Hilbert space that the decision rules lie in jointly with the
decision rules for the fusion center and sensors.
We introduce the following weighted count kernel, which
can be shown to satisfy the deﬁnition of kernel given in
Deﬁnition 1
0

0

S

kβ ((z, x ), (z , x )) =

s

s

0

Proposition 1. Consider β0 , which corresponds to the contribution of direct observations of the fusion center. An element
in the subdifferential of the objective function with respect to
the weight parameter β0 with w, all Qs and other βs , s = 0
being ﬁxed is given by
∂β0 G = −

λ
2

αi αj yi yj I[x0 = x0 ],
i
j

(5)

i,j

where G denotes the objective function in (4).
Consider βs for s = 1, . . . , S, which corresponds to the
contribution of sensor s. An element in the subdifferential of
the objective function with respect to the weight parameter βs
with w, all Qs and all other βs , s = s being ﬁxed is given
by
λ
αi αj yi yj Q(z s |xs )Q(z s |xs ).
(6)
∂βs G = −
i
j
2 i,j,zs

0

βs I[z = z ]+β0 I[x = x ] (3)
s=1

where I[·] is an indicator function, and βs ≥ 0 for s =
0, 1, . . . , S. Here, each weight parameter, say βs , represents
the contribution of sensor s in the decision rule of the fusion
center. In particular, β0 represents the contribution of the direct
observations of the fusion center. Thus, the Hilbert space Hβ
over which the decision rule of the fusion center is chosen is
spanned by the weighted count kernel kβ (·, ·).

The above proposition can be proved by conjugate dual
arguments, which is omitted here due to the space limitations.

3

B. Optimization over w

is bounded by the approximate empirical φ-risk as follows:

Given the optimal RKHS associated with kβ , we now ﬁnd
the optimal decision rule for the fusion center by optimizing
G(β; w; Q) with respect to w. Due to the arguments similar to
the proof of the kernel representer theorem [10], the optimal
N
0
w ∈ Hβ can be expressed as w =
i=1 αi yi Φβ (xi , xi ).
Following the arguments in [8], the coefﬁcients αi for i =
1, . . . , N in w should solve the following maximization problem.

inf

f ∈F

⎧
⎨
⎩

N

⎫
⎬

N

αi −
i

1
αi αj yi yj Φβ (xi , x0 ), Φβ (xj , x0 )
i
j
2 i,j=1

Hβ

⎭

1
inf
f ∈F0 N

.

− 2lRN (F ) −

i=1

2
ln( N )
2N

N

φ(yi w, Φβ (xi , x0 )
i

Hβ )

+ 2lRN (F0 ) +

i=1

2
ln( N )
2N

Proposition 3. Let the alphabet sizes of the observations
be bounded by Cx and the alphabet sizes of the quantized
variables by all sensors be bounded by Cz , i.e. the rate
constraints from the sensors to the fusion center be bounded
by log Cz . An upper bound on the Rademacher complexity is
given by
√
N
2B D
E sup
Φ (xi , x0 ), Φ (xi , x0 ) Hβ +
RN (F0 ) ≤
i
i
N
Q∈Q0 i=1
2(N − 1)

In this subsection, we ﬁnd the optimal decentralized decision rules for sensors. Similar to the optimization over β, the
major step here is to ﬁnd an element in the subdifferential of
the objective function G(β; w; Q) with respect to each Qs (·|·).

N
sup k ((z, x0 ), (z , x 0 ))
2 z,z

1
2

2Cx (S + 1) log Cz

S

where k ((z, x0 ), (z , x 0 )) = s=1 I[z s = z s ] + I[x0 = x 0 ],
Φ (xi , x0 ) = z k ((z, x0 ), ·)Q(z|xi ), B is the upper bound
i
i
on w Hβ , and D is the upper bound on βs .

Proposition 2. Consider sensor s for s = 1, . . . , S. An
element in the subdifferential of the objective function with
respect to the local decision rule of sensor s with w, β and
all other Q(·|·)s being ﬁxed is given by

i,j,z,z

Hβ )

where φ is Lipschitz with constant l, F0 includes only deterministic rules for sensors, and RN (F ) is the Rademacher
complexity of the function class F given in [8]. It is clear
that the bounds on the Rademacher complexity characterize
how close the approximate empirical risk function that the
designed decision rules achieve is to the true risk function.
In the following, we provide an bound on the Rademacher
complexity for our problem.

C. Optimization over Q(·|·)

αi αj yi yj Q(z |xj )

φ(yi w, Φβ (xi , x0 )
i

f ∈F

The above problem is a quadratic optimization problem and
can hence be solved easily by alternatively updating the value
of each αi . We note that the difference here from [8] is that
the inner product Φβ (xi , x0 ), Φβ (xj , x0 ) Hβ is taken over
i
j
the Hilbert space RKHS which allows the fusion center’s
decision rule to count contributions from sensors and its
own observations differently based on the quality of sensors’
observations, the quality of the fusion center’s observations,
and the rate constraints on sensors’ transmissions.

−λ

N

≤ inf Eφ(Y γ(Z, X 0 )) ≤

max

1
0≤αi ≤ λ ,i=1,...,N

1
N

We note that the above bound approaches zero as the number N of training samples approaches inﬁnity, thus providing
a tightest upper bound. It can be seen from the above that
the number of samples needed for RN (F0 ) to approach zero
is the same as in [8] suggesting that optimization over weight
parameters in the weighted count kernel does not require more
number of samples for the approximate empirical risk function
to be close to the true risk function.

Q(z|xi )
kβ ((z, x0 ), (z, x0 ))
i
j
Q(xs |xs )
i
×I[xs = xs ]I[z s = z s ].
¯i
¯
i
(7)

V. G ENERALIZATION TO T REE -S TRUCTURED N ETWORKS
The proof here is based on conjugate dual arguments and
is omitted due to the space limitations.

In this section, we brieﬂy describe how to generalize our
study to a tree-structured sensor network. In particular, we
now consider a sensor network with sensors conﬁgured in a
tree structure with the fusion center being the root of the tree.
All sensors and the fusion center can receive observations of
an environmental event. Sequentially from the leave sensors,
each sensor node quantizes its observation and its received
information from all its children in the tree and then forwards
the quantized information to its parent. Finally, the root, which
is the fusion center, makes a decision about the event state
based on its own observations and the information received
from all its children sensors. There are rate constraints (i.e.,

D. Bounds on True Risk Function
In this section, we derive bounds on the true risk function Eφ(Y γ(Z, X 0 )) based on the approximate empirical
N
1
risk function inf f ∈F N i=1 φ(yi w, Φβ (xi , x0 ) Hβ ), where
i
0
0
γ(Z, X ) = w, Φβ (Z, X ) Hβ , w ∈ Hβ , Q ∈ Q, β ∈ RS+1 ,
and F corresponds to the set Hβ × Q × RS+1 .
Following the arguments similar to [8], we show that with
a probability at least 1 − 2δ the true φ-risk Eφ(Y γ(Z, X 0 ))

4

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF PERFORMANCES OF CASES 1 AND 2 ( WITH AND
WITHOUT FUSION CENTER ’ S OBSERVATIONS , RESPECTIVELY )
S=1
S=2
S=3
S=4
S=5
Case 1
Error
0.0452
0.0205
0.0061
0.0053
0.0016
Error
0.0154
0.0077
0.0034
0.0020
0.0007
Case 2
β0
3.4712
2.8214
3.0838
3.3351
2.4300

TABLE II
I MPACT OF TRANSMISSION RATE CONSTRAINTS ON THE PERFORMANCE
4 sensors: 1 bit
3 sensors: 1 bit
1 sensor: 2 bits
2 sensors: 1 bit
2 sensors: 2 bits
1 sensors: 1 bit
3 sensors: 2 bits
4 sensors 2 bits

integer bit constraints) for all transmission links in the network
so that the quantized alphabet size of each sensor is determined
by the rate constraint on this sensor’s transmission to its parent.
The optimization problem for ﬁnding the decision rules for
the fusion center and sensors can be formulated and solved in
the same fashion as for the one-level sensor network studied
in Section IV. The difference lies in that now the optimization
over the weights in the weighted count kernel also takes into
account the impact of the network structure on the fusion
center’s decision rule. More details will be included in the
journal version of this work, which is now in preparation.

β1
1

β2
0.8502

β3
0.9495

β4
0.9634

Error prob.
0.0059

1

0.9024

1.1541

2.2776

0.0050

1

1.0254

2.3541

2.3016

0.0043

1
1

2.4425
0.8972

3.0014
0.9961

2.9601
0.8875

0.0035
0.0029

can transmit at 2 bits to the fusion center are higher than those
that can transmit only at 1 bit. This is reasonable because the
fusion center counts more on the less quantized information
transmitted from sensors.
VII. S UMMARY AND C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed a weighted count kernel,
and introduced the associated weight parameters into the risk
minimization formulation for ﬁnding decision rules for fusion
center and sensors. Consequently, these decision rules can take
into account the quality of sensors’ observations, the quality
of the fusion center’s observations, and the rate constraints on
sensors’ transmissions. We have also exploited the properties
of the optimization problem for simplifying the optimization
algorithm. We have further discussed the generalization to
multilevel tree-structured networks based on our previous work
[9]. Moreover, we have demonstrated the performance of the
weighted count kernel via numerical results.

VI. N UMERICAL R ESULTS
We ﬁrst study the impact of the fusion center’s observations
on the performance of the system. In particular, we compare
the decision error probabilities for two cases with the fusion
center having or not having observations, respectively. For
both cases, we assume that the sensors have independent
observations. We generate 300 data samples for training, and
10000 data samples for testing. For each sample, we generate
yi with uniform probability on +1 and −1. We then generate
the noise variable ns for each sensor and the fusion center
independently, where P (ns = 0) = 0.6, P (ns = +1) = 0.2
and P (ns = −1) = 0.2. Each observation equals xs = y + ns
for s = 0, 1, . . . , S. In Table I, we compare the error probabilities for cases 1 and 2 with the fusion center respectively
receiving or not receiving observations. It can be seen that case
2 always has smaller error probabilities than case 1 due to the
additional observations at the fusion center. Such improvement
gets smaller as the number of sensors increases, because the
observations by the fusion center should have less effect on
the performance of the system. It can also be seen that the
weight β0 of the fusion center’s direct observations is bigger
than the weights of sensors which are set to be one, suggesting
that the fusion center count on direct observations more than
quantized information.
We now study the impact of the rate constraints on the
performance of system. We study a four-sensor network.
Training samples are generated in the same fashion as the ﬁrst
experiment. We study the following ﬁve cases. For the ﬁrst
case, all sensors’ transmission rates to the fusion center are
limited to 1 bit. For the second case, one sensor’s transmission
rate increases to 2 bits, and all other sensors’ rates are still 1
bit. For each of the remaining three cases, we allow one more
sensor’s transmission rate to increase to 2 bits.
In Table II, we provide the optimal weights corresponding to
all sensors and the resulting detection error probability for the
ﬁve cases. It is clear that the detection error decreases as more
sensors are allowed to transmit at 2 bits. Furthermore, for each
case, the weight parameters corresponding to the sensors that

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work of J. Hu and Y. Liang was supported by the
National Science Foundation CAREER Award under Grant
CCF-10-26565.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. N. Tsitsiklis, “Decentralized detection,” in Advances in Signal Processing, edited by H. V. Poor and J. B. Thomas, JAI Press, vol. 2, pp.
297–344, 1993.
[2] R. S. Blum, S. A. Kassam, and H. V. Poor, “Distributed detection with
multiple sensors: Part II-advanced topics,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 85, no. 1,
pp. 64–79, Jan. 1997.
[3] J. F. Chamberland and V. V. Veeravalli, “Decentralized detection in
sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Proc., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 407–
416, 2003.
[4] M. M. AI-Ibrahim and P. K. Varshney, “Nonparametric sequential detection based on multisensor data,” in Proc. 23rd Annu. Conf. Information
Science Systems, Mar. 1989, pp. 157–162.
[5] A. Nasipuri and S. Tantaratana, “Nonparametric distributed detection
using wilconxin statistics,” Signal Processing, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 139–
146, 1997.
[6] J. B. Predd, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Distributed learning
in wireless sensor networks: Application issues and the problem of
distributed inference,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 56–69, Jul. 2006.
[7] ——, “Consistency in models for distributed learning under communication constraints,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp.
52–63, Jan. 2006.
[8] X. Nguyen, M. J. Wainwright, and M. I. Jordan, “Nonparametric
decentralized detection using kernel methods,” IEEE Trans. Signal Proc.,
vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4053–4066, Nov. 2005.
[9] J. Hu, Y. Liang, and E. P. Xing, “Nonparametric decision making based
on tree-structured information aggregation,” in Proc. Annu. Allerton
Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep.
2011.
[10] B. Scholkopf and A. Smola, Learning with Kernels. MA: MIT press,
2002.

5

