Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Wed May 16 23:11:29 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:52 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      445172 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569567009

Multi-Level Error-Resilient Neural Networks
Amir Hesam Salavati and Amin Karbasi
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Email: hesam.salavati@epﬂ.ch, amin.karbasi@epﬂ.ch,

An interesting question which arises in this context is
whether one can increase the storage capacity of neural
networks beyond the current linear scaling and achieve results
similar to coding theory. To this end, Kumar et al. [7]
suggested a new formulation of the problem where only a
suitable set of patterns was considered for storing. This way
they could show that the performance of neural networks in
terms of storage capacity increases signiﬁcantly. Following
the same philosophy, we will focus on memorizing a random
subset of patterns of length n such that the dimension of the
training set is k < n. In other words, we are interested in
memorizing a set of patterns that have a certain degree of
structure and redundancy. We exploit this structure both to
increase the number of patterns that can be memorized (from
linear to exponential) and to increase the number of errors that
can be corrected when the network is faced with corrupted
inputs.
The success of [7] is mainly due to forming a bipartite
network/graph (as opposed to a complete graph) whose role
is to enforce the suitable constraints on the patterns, very
similar to the role played by Tanner graphs in coding. More
speciﬁcally, one layer is used to feed the patterns to the
network (so called variable nodes in coding) and the other
takes into account the inherent structure of the input patterns
(so called check nodes in coding). A natural way to enforce
structures on inputs is to assume that the connectivity matrix
of the bipartite graph is orthogonal to all of the input patterns.
However, the authors in [7] heavily rely on the fact that the
bipartite graph is fully known and given, and satisﬁes some
sparsity and expansion properties. The expansion assumption
is made to ensure that the resulting set of patterns are resilient
against fair amount of noise. Unfortunately, no algorithm for
ﬁnding such a bipartite graph was proposed.
Our main contribution in this paper is to relax the above assumptions while achieving better error correction performance.
More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose an iterative algorithm that
can ﬁnd a sparse bipartite graph that satisﬁes the desired set of
constraints. We also provide an upper bound on the block error
rate of the method that deploys this learning strategy. We then
proceed to devise a multi-layer network whose performance
in terms of error tolerance improves signiﬁcantly upon [7] and
no longer needs to be an expander.

Abstract—The problem of neural network association is to
retrieve a previously memorized pattern from its noisy version
using a network of neurons. An ideal neural network should
include three components simultaneously: a learning algorithm,
a large pattern retrieval capacity and resilience against noise.
Prior works in this area usually improve one or two aspects at
the cost of the third.
Our work takes a step forward in closing this gap. More
speciﬁcally, we show that by forcing natural constraints on the
set of learning patterns, we can drastically improve the retrieval
capacity of our neural network. Moreover, we devise a learning
algorithm whose role is to learn those patterns satisfying the
above mentioned constraints. Finally we show that our neural
network can cope with a fair amount of noise.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Neural networks are famous for their ability to learn and
reliably perform a required task. An important example is the
case of (associative) memory where we are asked to memorize
(learn) a set of given patterns. Later, corrupted versions of the
memorized patterns will be shown to us and we have to return
the correct memorized patterns. In essence, this problem is
very similar to the one faced in communication systems where
the goal is to reliably transmit and efﬁciently decode a set of
patterns (so called codewords) over a noisy channel.
As one would naturally expect, reliability is certainly a
very important issue both in the neural associative memories
and in communication systems. Indeed, the last three decades
witnessed many reliable artiﬁcial associative neural networks.
See for instance [5], [14], [6], [9], [13], [4].
However, despite common techniques and methods deployed in both ﬁelds (e.g., graphical models, iterative algorithms, etc), there has been a quantitative difference in terms of
another important criterion: the efﬁciency. In communication
systems, by using modern coding techniques it has become
clear that the number of reliably transmitted codewords over
a noisy channel can be made exponential in n, the length
of the codewords. However, using current neural networks of
size n to memorize a set of randomly chosen patterns, the
maximum number of patterns that can be reliably memorized
scales linearly in n [8], [14].
In search for the reasons beyond the inefﬁciency of the
storage capacity of neural networks, we found out that a large
body of past work (e.g., [5], [14], [6], [9]) followed a common
assumption that a neural network should be able to memorize
any subset of patterns drawn randomly from the set of all
possible vectors of length n. Although this assumption gives
the network a sense of generality, it reduces its storage capacity
to a great extent.

II. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In contrast to the mainstream work in neural associative
memories, we focus on non-binary neurons, i.e., neurons that
can assume a ﬁnite set of integer values S = {0, 1, . . . , S − 1}

1

for their states (where S > 2). A natural way to interpret the
multi-level states is to think of the short-term (normalized)
ﬁring rate of a neuron as its output. Neurons can only perform
simple operations. In particular, we restrict the operations at
each neuron to a linear summation over the inputs, and a
possibly non-linear thresholding operation. In particular, a
neuron x updates its state based on the states of its neighbors
{si }n as follows:
i=1
n
1) It computes the weighted sum h = i=1 wi si , where
wi denotes the weight of the input link from si .
2) It updates its state as x = f (h), where f : R → S
is a possibly non-linear function from the ﬁeld of real
numbers R to S.
Neural associative memory aims to memorize C patterns of
length n by determining the weighted connectivity matrix
of the neural network (learning phase) such that the given
patterns are stable states of the network. Furthermore, the
network should be able to tolerate a fair amount of noise so
that it can return the correct memorized pattern in response
to a corrupted query (recall phase). Among the networks with
these two abilities, the one with largest C is the most desirable.
We ﬁrst focus on learning the connectivity matrix of a neural
graph which memorizes a set of patterns having some inherent
redundancy. More speciﬁcally, we assume to have C vectors
of length n with non-negative integer entries, where these
patterns form a subspace of dimension k < n. We would
like to memorize these patterns by ﬁnding a set of non-zero
vectors w1 , . . . , wm ∈ Rn that are orthogonal to the set of
given patterns. Furthermore, we are interested in rather sparse
vectors. Putting the training patterns in a matrix XC×n and
focusing on one such vector w, we can formulate the problem
as:
min X · w 2
(1a)

Constraint nodes

Y1

X1

0

≤q

and

w

2
2

≥

X2

...

...

Ym

Xn

Pattern nodes
Fig. 1.

A bipartite graph that represents the constraints on the training set.

A. Related Works
Designing artiﬁcial associative memories has been an active
topic of research for the past three decades. Inspired by
the Hebbian learning rule, Hopﬁeld in his seminal work [5]
introduced the Hopﬁeld network: an auto-associative neural
mechanism of size n with binary state neurons in which
patterns are assumed to be binary vectors of length n. The
capacity of a Hopﬁeld network under vanishing block error
probability was later shown to be O(n/ log(n)) in [8].
Due to the low capacity of Hopﬁeld networks, extension
of associative memories to non-binary neural models has also
been explored in the past. For instance, in [6] the authors
investigated a multi-state complex-valued neural associative
memories for which the estimated capacity is C < 0.15n.
Under the same model but using a different learning method,
Muezzinoglu et al. [9] showed that the capacity can be
increased to C = n. However the complexity of the weight
computation mechanism is prohibitive.
A line of recent work has made considerable efforts to
exploit the inherent structure of the patterns in order to
increase both capacity and error correction capabilities. Such
methods either make use of higher order correlations of
patterns or focus merely on those patterns that have some
sort of redundancy. As a result, they differ from previous
methods for which every possible random set of patterns was
considered. Pioneering this prospect, Berrou and Gripon [4]
achieved considerable improvements in the pattern retrieval
capacity of Hopﬁeld networks, by utilizing Walsh-Hadamard
sequences. Using low correlation sequences has also been
considered in [13], which results in increasing the storage
capacity of Hopﬁeld networks to n without requiring any
separate decoding stage.
In contrast to the pairwise correlation of the Hopﬁeld model
[5], Peretto et al. [11] deployed higher order neural models:
the state of the neurons not only depends on the state of their
neighbors, but also on the correlation among them. Under this
model, they showed that the storage capacity of a higher-order
Hopﬁeld network can be improved to C = O(np−2 ), where
p is the degree of correlation considered. The main drawback
of this model was again the huge computational complexity
required in the learning phase. To address this difﬁculty while
being able to capture higher-order correlations, a bipartite

subject to
w

Y2

(1b)

where q ∈ N determines the degree of sparsity and ∈ R+
prevents the all-zero solution. A solution to the above problem
yields a sparse bipartite graph which corresponds to the basis
vectors of the null space speciﬁed by the patterns in the
training set. It can therefore be described by Figure 1 with
a connectivity matrix W ∈ Rm×n such that X W T = 0.
In the recall phase, the neural network is fed with noisy inputs. A possibly noisy version of an input pattern is initialized
as the states of the pattern neurons x1 , x2 , . . . , xn . Here, we
assume that the noise is integer valued and additive (modulu
S). In formula, we have y = W (xµ + z) = W z where z is
the noise added to pattern xµ . Hence, we are looking for an
algorithm that can use this information to provably eliminate
the effect of noise and return the correct pattern.
Remark 1. A solution in the learning/recall phase is acceptable only if it can be found by simple operations at neurons.
Before presenting our solution, we brieﬂy overview the
relation between the previous works and the one presented
in this paper.

2

Algorithm 1 Iterative Learning
Input: pattern matrix X , stopping point p.
Output: w
while y(t) max > p do
Compute y(t) = X ·w(t) .
X 2

graph inspired from iterative coding theory was introduced in
[7]. Under the assumptions that the bipartite graph is known,
sparse, and expander, the proposed algorithm increased the
pattern retrieval capacity to C = O(an ), for some a > 1.
The main drawbacks in the proposed approach is the lack of
a learning algorithm as well as the assumption that the weight
matrix should be an expander. The sparsity criterion on the
other hand, as it was noted by the authors, is necessary in the
recall phase and biologically more meaningful.
In this paper, we focus on solving the above two problems
in [7]. We start by proposing an iterative learning algorithm
that identiﬁes a sparse weight matrix W . The weight matrix
W should satisfy a set of linear constraints X W T = 0. We
then propose a novel network architecture which eliminates
the need for the expansion criteria while achieving better
performance than the error correction algorithm proposed in
[7].
To learn a sparse neural graph, we follow ideas borrowed
from iterative neural learning [15], [10] and compressive
sensing [2], [3]. Constructing a factor-graph model for neural
associative memory has been also addressed in [1] where
a message-passing algorithm is proposed to memorize any
set of random patterns. However, in this paper we focus on
memorizing patterns belonging to subspaces with sparsity in
mind as well. The difference would again be apparent in the
pattern retrieval capacity (linear vs. exponential in network
size).

Update w(t + 1) = η (1 + 2λt )w(t) − 2αt X Xy(t)
2
Update λt+1 = λt + γ( − w
t ← t + 1.
end while

III. L EARNING A LGORITHM

2
2

− λ( w

− ) + γ(g(w) − q ).

(2)

i=1

where σ is chosen appropriately. By calculating the derivative
of the objective function and primal-dual optimization techniques we obtain the following iterative algorithm for (2) (the
details are tedious and left to our technical report [12]):
X · w(t)
X 2

w(t + 1) = (1 + 2λt )w(t) − 2αt

E(t + 1) ≤ X .w (t) max + θt . By expanding X .w (t) we
X 2
X
will obtain E(t + 1) ≤ Dt max E(t) + θt where D(t) =
T
X
(1 + 2λt )IC×C − 2αt XX 2 . Hence we need θt → 0 as t → ∞
2
and ensuring Dt max < 1. The latter condition is satisﬁed if
λt ≤ amin /(amax − amin ). For the detailed proof, we refer the
interested readers to our technical report [12].
It must be noted that the above algorithm gives one possible
solution to the learning problem (2), as there are multiple local

X y(t)
− γt g(w) (3b)
X 2
(3c)

γt+1 = [γt + δ(g(w) − q )]

(4)

Sketch of the proof: Let E(t) = y(t) max . We
would like to show that E(t + 1) < E(t) for all iterations
t. We can write w(t + 1) = w (t) − χ(w (t); θt ) where
w (t) = (1 + 2λt )w(t) − 2αt X y . We can then show that
X 2

(3a)

λt+1 = λt + δ( − w 2 )
2

u if |u| > θ,
0 otherwise.

Theorem 1. If θt → 0 as t → ∞ and if λt < amin /(amax −
amin ), then there is a proper choice of αt in every iteration
t that ensures constant decrease in the objective function
X .w(t) max . Here amin = minµ xµ 2 / X 2 and amax =
maxµ xµ 2 / X 2 . For λt = 0, i.e. w(t) 2 ≥ , picking
0 < αt < 1 ensures gradual convergence.

2
tanh(σwi )

y(t) =

.

The next theorem derives the necessary conditions on αt , λt
and θt such that Algorithm 1 converges to a sparse solution.

In the above problem, we have approximated the constraint
w 0 ≤ q with g(w) ≤ q since . 0 is not a well-behaved
function. The function g(w) is chosen such that it favors
sparsity. For instance one can pick g(w) to be . 1 , which
leads to 1 -norm minimizations. In this paper, we consider
the function
n
g(w) =

.

Remark 2. the above choice of soft-theresholding function is
very similar to the one selected by Donoho et al. in [3] in
order to recover a sparse signal from a set of measurements.
The authors prove that their choice of soft-threshold function
results in optimal sparsity-undersampling trade-off.

We are interested in an iterative algorithm that is simple
enough to be implemented by a network of neurons. Therefore,
we ﬁrst relax (1) as follows:
2

θt

where t denotes the iteration number, X is the transpose
of matrix X , δ and αt are small step sizes and [·]+ denotes
max(·, 0).
For our choice of g(w), the ith entry of the function f (w) =
2
g(w), denoted by fi (w) reduces to 2σwi (1 − tanh(σwi )2 ).
For very small values of wi , fi (w) wi and for large values
of wi , fi (w) 0. Therefore, by looking at (3b) we see that
the last term is pushing small values in w(t + 1) towards zero
while leaving the larger values intact. Therefore, we remove
the last term completely and enforce small entries to zero in
each update which in turn enforces sparsity. The ﬁnal iterative
learning procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.
Here, θt is a positive threshold at iteration t and η(.)θt is
the point-wise soft-thresholding function given below:
η(u)θ =

min X · w

2
2)

(3d)

3

Wg

as feedback to pattern neuron xj from the constraint neurons.
Hence, the sign of gj provides an indication of the sign of the
noise that affects xj , and |gj | indicates the conﬁdence level in
the decision regarding the sign of the noise.

...

...

...

...

...

...

¯
Theorem 2. Let d and dmin be the average and minimum
degree of pattern neurons, respectively. Then, Algorithm 2 can
correct a single error in the input pattern with probability at

...

...
W1

Fig. 2.

...

W2

WL

least 1 −

A two-level error correcting neural network.

Backward iteration: Each neuron xj computes
gj =

dmin

if ϕ → 1.

For the proof, we refer the interested readers to our technical
report [12].
Given that each local network is able to correct one pattern
with high probability, L such networks can correct L input
errors if they are separated such that only one error appears
in the input of each local network. Otherwise, there would
be a probability that the network could not handle the errors.
In that case, we feed the overall pattern of length n to the
second layer with the connectivity matrix Wg , which enforces
mg global constraints. And since the probability of correcting
two erroneous nodes increases with the input size, we expect
to have a better error correction probability in the second layer.
Therefore, using this simple scheme we expect to gain a lot in
correcting errors in the patterns. In the next section, we provide
simulation results which conﬁrm our expectations and show
that the block error rate can be improved by a factor of 100
in some cases.

Algorithm 2 Error Correction
1: for t = 1 → tmax do
2:
Forward iteration: Calculate the weighted input sum
n
hi = j=1 Wij xj , for each neuron yi and set:

hi < 0
 1,
0,
hi = 0 .
yi =

−1, otherwise
3:

¯
d
m

m
i=1 Wij yi
.
m
i=1 |Wij |

Update the state of each pattern neuron j according to
xj = xj + sgn(gj ) only if |gj | > ϕ.
5:
t←t+1
6: end for
4:

Remark 3. The number of constraints for the second layer affects the gain one obtains in the error performance. Intuitively,
if the number of global constraints is large, we are enforcing
more constraints so we expect a better error performance. We
can think of determining the number even adaptively, i.e. if
the error performance that we are getting is unacceptable, we
can look deeper in patterns to identify their internal structure
by searching for more constraints. This would be a subject of
our future research.

minimums for this problem corresponding to different nullbases of the subspace deﬁned by the patterns in the training set.
Any of these vectors are acceptable for the proposed algorithm.
IV. M ULTI - LEVEL N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE
In order to have error correction capabilities we propose a
new network structure (see Figure 2). To make the description
clear and simple we only concentrate on a two-level neural
network. However, the generalization of this idea is trivial and
left to the reader.
The idea behind this new architecture is that we divide the
input pattern of size n into L sub-patterns of length n/L.
Now we feed each sub-pattern to a neural network which
enforces m constraints1 on the sub-pattern in order to correct
the input errors. Such model might be specially useful in cases
where the input is modular, similar to the case of memorizing
different words of a sentence and enforcing global grammatical
constraints on the sentence as a whole, or the case where local
sub-patterns have few dominant principle components.
The local networks in the ﬁrst level and the global network
in the second level use Algorithm 2, which is a variant of the
”bit-ﬂipping” method proposed in [7], to correct the errors.
Note that if the states of the pattern neurons xi correspond to
a pattern from X (i.e., the noise-free case), then for all i =
1, . . . , m we have yi = 0. The quantity gj can be interpreted

V. PATTERN R ETRIEVAL C APACITY
The following theorem shows that the proposed neural
architecture is capable of memorizing an exponential number
of patterns in n.
Theorem 3. Let X be the C × n matrix, formed by C vectors
of length n with non-negative integer entries between 0 and
S − 1. Furthermore, let kg = rn for some 0 < r < 1. Then,
there exists a data set X with C = arn , a > 1, and rank(X ) =
kg < n, such that they can be memorized by the proposed
multi-level neural network shown in ﬁgure 2.
The proof of the theorem can be found in the technical
report [12].
VI. S IMULATION R ESULTS
We have simulated the proposed learning algorithm in the
multi-level architecture to investigate the block error rate of
the suggested approach and the gain we obtain in error rates
by adding a second level. We constructed 4 local networks,
each with n/4 pattern and m constraint nodes.

1 The number of constraints for different networks can vary. For simplicity
of notiﬁcations we assume equal sizes.

4

A. Learning Phase
We generated a sample data set of C = 10000 patterns of
length n where each block of n/4 belonged to a subspace of
dimension k < n/4. Note that C can be an exponential number
in n. However, we selected C = 10000 as an example to show
the performance of the algorithm because even for small values
of k, and exponential number in k will become too large to
handle numerically. The result of the learning algorithm is
four different local connectivity matrices W1 , . . . , W4 as well
as a global weight matrix Wg . The number of local constraints
was m = n/4 − k and the number of global constraints was
mg = n − kg , where kg is dimension of the subspace for
overall pattern.
Table VI-A shows the average number of iterations executed
before convergence is reached for different local and global
constraints. It also gives the average sparsity ratio for the
columns of weight matrices. The sparsity ratio is deﬁned as
ρ = κ/n, where κ is the number of non-zero elements.

Fig. 3.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Prof. Amin Shokrollahi for
helpful comments and discussions. This work was supported
by Grant 228021-ECCSciEng of the European Research Council.

TABLE I
AVERAGE NUMBER OF CONVERGENCE ITERATIONS AND SPARSITY IN THE
LOCAL AND GLOBAL NETWORKS FOR n = 400

Local
Global

Sparsity
kg = 100
0.28
0.22

Ratio
kg = 200
0.32
0.26

R EFERENCES

Convergence Steps
kg = 100
kg = 200
4808
5064
14426
33206

[1] A. Braunstein, R. Zecchina, Learning by message-passing in networks
of discrete synapses, Phys. Rev. Lett., Vol. 96, No. 3, 2006, pp. 0302011-030201-4
[2] E. Cands, T. Tao, Near optimal signal recovery from random projections:
Universal encoding strategies?, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, Vol.
52, No. 12, 2006, pp. 5406-5425.
[3] D. L. Donoho, A. Maleki, A. Montanari, Message passing algorithms
for compressed sensing, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., Vol. 106, 2009, pp.
1891418919.
[4] V. Gripon, C. Berrou, Sparse neural networks with large learning
diversity, IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks, Vol. 22, No. 7, 2011, pp.
10871096.
[5] J. J. Hopﬁeld, Neural networks and physical systems with emergent
collective computational abilities, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., Vol. 79, 1982,
pp. 2554-2558.
[6] S. Jankowski, A. Lozowski, J.M., Zurada, Complex-valued multistate
neural associative memory, IEEE Tran. Neur. Net., Vol. 1 , No. 6, 1996,
pp. 1491-1496.
[7] K.R. Kumar, A.H. Salavati and A. Shokrollahi, Exponential pattern
retrieval capacity with non-binary associative memory, Proc. IEEE Int.
Theory Work., 2011, pp. 80-84.
[8] R. McEliece, E. Posner, E. Rodemich, S. Venkatesh, The capacity of the
Hopﬁeld associative memory, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Jul. 1987.
[9] M. K. Muezzinoglu, C. Guzelis, J. M. Zurada, A new design method
for the complex-valued multistate Hopﬁeld associative memory, IEEE
Trans. Neur. Net., Vol. 14, No. 4, 2003, pp. 891-899.
[10] E. Oja, T. Kohonen, The subspace learning algorithm as a formalism
for pattern recognition and neural networks, Neural Networks, Vol. 1,
1988, pp. 277-284.
[11] P. Peretto, J. J. Niez, Long term memory storage capacity of multiconnected neural networks, Biological Cybernetics, Vol. 54, No. 1, 1986,
pp. 53-63.
[12] A. H. Salavati, A. Karbasi, Multi-Level Error-Resilient Neural Networks
with Learning, arXiv:1202.2770v1 [cs.NE]
[13] A. H. Salavati, K. R. Kumar, W. Gerstner, A. Shokrollahi, Neural
Pre-coding Increases the Pattern Retrieval Capacity of Hopﬁeld and
Bidirectional Associative Memories, IEEE Intl. Symp. Inform. Theory
(ISIT-11), 2011, pp. 850-854.
[14] S. S. Venkatesh, D. Psaltis, Linear and logarithmic capacities in
associative neural networks, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 35, No. 3,
1989, pp. 558-568.
[15] L. Xu, A. Krzyzak, E. Oja, Neural nets for dual subspace pattern
recognition method, Int. J. Neur. Syst., Vol. 2, No. 3, 1991, pp. 169-184.

B. Recall Phase
For the recall phase, in each trial we pick a pattern randomly
from the training set, corrupt a given number of its symbols
with ±1 noise and use the suggested algorithm to correct the
errors. As mentioned earlier, the errors are corrected ﬁrst at the
local and the at the global level. When ﬁnished, we compare
the output of the ﬁrst and the second level with the original
(uncorrupted) pattern x. An error is declared if the output does
not match at each stage.
Figure 3 illustrates the pattern error rates n = 400 with two
different values of kg = 100 and kg = 200. The results are
also compared to that of the bit-ﬂipping algorithm in [7] to
show the improved performance of the proposed algorithm. As
one can see, having a larger number of constraints at the global
level, i.e. having a smaller kg , will result in better pattern error
rates at the end of the second stage.
Table VI-B shows the gain we obtain by adding an additional second level to the network architecture. The gain is
calculated as the ratio between the pattern error rate at the
output of the ﬁrst and the second level.
TABLE II
G AIN IN PATTERN E RROR R ATE (PER) FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF
n = 400 AND INITIAL NUMBER OF ERRORS
Number of initial errors
2
3
4
5

Gain for kg = 100
10.2
6.22
4.58
3.55

Pattern error rate against the initial number of erroneous nodes

Gain for kg = 200
2.79
2.17
1.88
1.68

5

