Title:          
Creator:        www.freepdfconvert.com         
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Wed May 16 02:34:48 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:15 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      283840 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569565041

On Emptying a Wireless Network in Minimum Time
Vangelis Angelakis1 , Anthony Ephremides1,2, Qing He1 , and Di Yuan1
1

2

Department of Science and Technology, Link¨ ping University, Sweden
o
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, USA

time slots is minimized. Set-covering formulations enabled
a column generation method for solving the resulting linear
programming relaxations. For the minimum length scheduling
problem, a column-generation-based solution method was also
used in [9], which can approach an optimal solution, with
the advantage of a potentially reduced complexity. In [12]
the minimum-length scheduling problem was formulated as
a shortest path problem on Directed Acyclic Graphs and the
authors obtained suboptimal analytic characterizations.
In this paper we consider the scheduling problem when
there is ﬁnite volumes of trafﬁc that the different users wish to
transmit over the shared channel to their destinations (which
may be different or one and the same). That is, we consider
the multiple access or interference channel with ﬁnite trafﬁc
volume that must be delivered in minimum time. Our contributions include new results on the combinatorial complexity
of the problem, on the structure of the optimal schedule,
and ﬁnally, new necessary and/or sufﬁcient conditions for
optimality based on the values of the transmission rates that
the users can transmit at, when these rates depend explicitly
or implicitly on the set of users who are allowed to transmit
simultaneously. Thus, our results contribute to the tightening
of the joint use of physical and MAC layer approaches and
point to practical and realistic algorithms for approximating,
or precisely determining, an optimal schedule.

Abstract—We consider N transmitter-receiver pairs that share
a wireless channel and we address the problem of obtaining a
schedule for activating subsets of these links so as to empty the
transmitter queues in minimum time. Our aim is to provide
theoretical insights for the optimality characterization of the
problem, using both a cross-layer model formulation, which
takes into account the effect of interference on achievable
transmission rates, as well as a collision-based model, which does
not incorporate the physical layer realities into the problem. We
present the basic linear programming formulation of the problem
and establish that the optimal schedule need not consist of more
than N subset activation frames. We then prove that the problem
is N P-hard for all reasonable continuous rate functions. Finally,
we obtain sufﬁcient and/or necessary conditions for optimality in
a number of special cases.
Index Terms– interference; optimality; scheduling; wireless
networks.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In shared wireless channels coordinating access amongst
many users remains a vexing problem. Whether the classical
collision models are used, that have been popular with the
networking community, or the more relevant and current
models that enable successful decoding in the presence of
interference and that use a cross-layer view of transmission
rate and access control, that are nowadays considered by the
physical layer community, it is still necessary to decide which
users are allowed to transmit and for how much time should
they transmit so as to attain some optimality goal. In other
words the so-called scheduling problem is still an important
and unsolved problem despite the fact that it has been studied
a great deal in the past.
Past work on this problem includes [8] in which a centralized, polynomial-time algorithm was obtained for static
networks with speciﬁed link trafﬁc requirements. The formulation was based on mapping the network to an undirected
graph and on assuming that any two links can be successfully
activated simultaneously as long as they do not share common
vertices on the graph. In [6], [7] N P-hardness was addressed
for the problem of determining a minimum-length schedule
under a given trafﬁc demand in a wireless network with
SINR constraints, using respectively the protocol model and a
collision-based model. In some special cases the structure of
the trafﬁc demand allowed a polynomial algorithm.
In [2], [3] it was shown that more fundamental resource
allocation problems in wireless networks with SINR constraints, such as node and link assignment, are also N Phard. In these problems the goal is to assign at least one
time slot to each node, or link, such that the number of

II. S YSTEM M ODEL
We consider a wireless network of N transmitter-receiver
pairs, or links. These are associated with a vector d of trafﬁc
demand, corresponding to a ﬁnite amount of backlogged data
at the transmitters’ queues. Scheduling a group c of these
N links means that all links in c are concurrently activated,
with given power each, for some positive amount of time. The
minimum-length scheduling problem, amounts to determining
which groups should be selected, and the duration of activating
each group, such that the entire demand vector is served (i.e.
the queues are emptied) in minimum time. For any group c ,
the effective transmit rate ric of any link i ∈ c is directly
coupled to the composition of the activation group.
The ﬁrst rate model that we consider, couples the links via
the G channel gains matrix, whose element Gij is the channel
gain between the transmitter of link i and the receiver of link
j. Denoting with Pi the transmission power for link i, and σ 2
the noise variance, the signal-to-interference-and-noise (SINR)
ratio for link i, when group c is activated, is given by:

1

γic =

Pi Gii
Pk Gki + σ 2

.

is useful in our case, as it solidiﬁes the form of LP basic
solutions to be discussed later.

(1)

Lemma 1. There exists an optimal schedule such that, before
reaching the end of the time duration of a group, none of the
link queues in the group is empty.

k∈c ,k=i

Under this model, rate is a function F of SINR, since
for the transmission to be successful the SINR must exceed
a threshold, which in turn is an increasing function of the
rate. This is a common and familiar approach used for the
AWGN channel, and by extension, an approximation in an
interference environment, by assuming interference as noise
(see for example [13] and the references therein). We designate
this model IA . We also consider the “packet-based” approach
to “collision” channels, where a packet is successful if and
only if the SINR meets a threshold γ ∗ without regard to the
number of bits in it, or its duration. Indeed, this is a popular
approach in the wireless networking community for the study
of the scheduling problem (e.g. [2], [3], [5], [9]) as it decouples
the packet success from the transmission rate. We call this
model IB .
In the second model we consider the rates are determined
solely by the activation group cardinality. In this special case
of the ﬁrst model all concurrently activated links share the
same rate value. An example scenario is a system where all
receivers are located at a central point, with N transmitters
having the same distance (on a circle) to the center with
geometric channel gain. A similar case was considered in [5].
This case is much more structured than the one in the general
setting, and its properties will be detailed in the subsequent
sections. Here, the rate is deﬁned using an N -dimensional rate
vector r = (r1 , . . . , rN ), with each element ri denoting the
rate of group size i ∈ {1, . . . , N }. We call this model II.
In both models rate has the following, intuitive, property:
If two links are activated concurrently their rates can not be
higher than the rates of their respective individual activation.
Thus, throughout the paper, we assume that rates in a group
do not grow when it is augmented. We will be referring to
this property as augmentation-rate monotonicity.

Proof: Assume the opposite. Then there exists a group
with activation duration t > 0, and a link i ∈ c , such that
the queue size served during this time, denoted by δi , satisﬁes
δ
the condition δi < ric t. Let t = riic . Consider splitting the
running time t in two segments with duration t and t − t
respectively. In the ﬁrst segment, group c is run, and in the
second segment, the reduced group c \ {i} is run. The lemma
follows from two observations. First, the served queue volume
of link i in segment one remains δi . Second, any of the links
other than i is served for an overall time of t, and their rates
in c \ {i} are not worse, if not better, than those in c .
By Lemma 1, we arrive at the following LP formulation.
Notice that since (2b) are equalities, the formulation is in the
so called standard LP form, namely

c

min

xc

(2a)

ric xc = di , i = 1, . . . , N,

(2b)

c ∈H

s. t.
c ∈H

x ≥ 0.

(2c)

There are 2N − 1 possible groups. However, we prove
below that we can always construct an optimal scheduling
solution using at most N groups. The result follows from the
fundamental optimality theory of LP and the structure of (2).
Lemma 2. There exists an optimal scheduling solution using
at most N groups, i.e., |H∗ | ≤ N .
Proof: Formulation (2) is clearly feasible. Hence, by the
fundamentals of linear programming (e.g., [11]), there exists
an optimal basic solution. For any feasible basic solution, the
number of positive values is no more than the number of rows
N, and equals N if the solution is non-degenerated, and thus
the lemma follows.

III. L INEAR P ROGRAMMING F ORMULATION
If all the link rates for all groups c (subsets of the set
of links) are known, the scheduling problem accepts a linear
programming (LP) formulation. Although the LP formulation
does not lead to a practically feasible solution algorithm,
it enables us to gain structural insights. We introduce the
following notation:
Let the link set N = {1, . . . , N } be associated with a
strictly positive vector of demand d = {d1 , . . . , dN }T . Let
H denote the set of all subsets of N , excluding the empty
set. The scheduling decision vector is denoted as x and each
element xc denotes the time duration of group c ∈ H. Clearly,
|H| = 2N − 1. Finally, H∗ denotes the set of groups that
correspond to an optimum schedule.
By the following lemma, at optimum all queue demands
will be met exactly (i.e. no link will be active with nothing
to transmit). This is rather intuitive and has up to now been
(implicitly) taken for granted (e.g., [5]). Formalizing this result

IV. C OMPLEXITY C ONSIDERATION FOR C ONTINUOUS
M ONOTONICALLY I NCREASING R ATE F UNCTIONS
By Lemma 2, there is always a compact representation of
optimality, thus approaching the globally optimal schedule
is equivalent to selecting the N “best” groups amongst the
2N − 1. For model IB , the problem has been shown to be
N P-hard [1], [3], [7]. A natural follow-up question is whether
the complexity reduces for IA . Is the problem tractable if
for example, the Shannon formula is used as rate function,
as has been widely done in the literature? In the following,
we provide a negative answer, showing that the problem is
in general hard for all rates that are continuous and strictly
increasing functions of the SINR.
Theorem 3. If the rates are strictly increasing functions of
the SINR, there are N P-hard instances of the minimum-length
scheduling problem.

2

Proof: Given the triplet (N, d, F ), where F is a continuous strictly increasing of the SINR, the recognition version of
the problem, by Lemma 2, is as follows. Are there N groups,
which can be represented using an N × N matrix, such that
the total time of satisfying demand d using these groups is at
most a given positive number? The problem is clearly in class
N P, as checking the validity of a solution (a certiﬁcate in the
form of a square matrix of size N ) is straightforward. Consider
a general-topology graph G = (V, E). Let N = |V|. Thus a
link in the scheduling instance corresponds to a vertex in G.
F −1
1
Let v = F −1 ( N ), and u = F −1 ((1)) , i.e., F −1 (1) = vu, also
1
N
1
note that u > 1 since F is strictly increasing. Let σ 2 = u .
For each edge (i, j) in the graph, set the coupling element
Gij = Gji = 1. Moreover, Gii = min{v, 1.0}, i ∈ N . All
other elements of the channel matrix are zero. Finally, the
v
transmit power Pi = Gii , i ∈ N .
Consider i, and any group that contains i, but not any of
the adjacent vertices in G. The SINR is vu = F −1 (1), thus
the rate is 1.0. If i is put into a group containing at least
v
one adjacent vertex in G, the SINR is no more than v/( Gii +
1
v
−1 1
( N ), because Gii ≥ 1 and u > 0. Thus
u) < v = F
1
the rate of i becomes strictly less than N . Suppose that at
optimum, a group c containing two links i and j, that are
adjacent in G, has a positive amount of time duration t >
0. Note that, in G, c corresponds to at least one connected
component (because i and j are adjacent). Denote by m ⊆ V
the component containing i and j, and let m = |m |. Note that
m ≥ 2. By the observation before, for each of the links in m ,
including i and j, the demand served in time t within group
t
c is strictly less than N .
Consider splitting group c into m groups, obtained by
combining c \ m with each of the individual links in m .
t
Each of the m groups is given time m . For all links in m ,
1
including i and j, the rate grows from less than N to 1.
t
Because m ≤ N , m is strictly more than enough to serve
t
demand N , for any link in m . The links in c \ m , are
served with the same time duration t, with rate no less than
before. We then repeat the same argument for the remaining
components, if necessary. In conclusion, there is an optimal
scheduling solution in which the groups are formed by links
corresponding to independent sets of G. At this stage, it is
apparent that solving the scheduling problem provides the
correct answer to the weighted fractional coloring problem
[10], with the demand vector d being the weights of the
vertices, and the result follows.
Theorem 3 generalizes the observation made in [6] on the
connection between fractional coloring and scheduling under
the so called protocol model, which uses a conﬂict graph
and disregards the channel matrix. As our result applies to
any monotonically strictly increasing function F in SINR,
one should not expect that the use of smooth rate functions,
including even linear ones, can result in reducing complexity.

Here we look into a special case, where the demand values
are uniform. For this setting, we readily provide a closed-form
scheduling solution requiring only linear time to compute, and
show it is globally optimal.
Theorem 4. For (N, d, r), let m∗ = argmaxN mrm . If all
m=1
demand values are uniform and equal to d, then the N groups,
{1, 2, . . . , m∗ }, {2, 3, . . . , m∗ + 1}, . . . {N, 1, . . . , m∗ − 1},
each scheduled for a time duration of m∗dm∗ , is optimal.
r
Proof: For all the links, the given schedule clearly meets
demand d exactly. For any feasible scheduling solution (not
restricted to the case in question) of length T , the total data
trafﬁc demand, i∈N di , divided by T , gives the average data
throughput. As i∈N di is a constant, a schedule is minimum
in time if ( i∈N di )/T attains the maximum possible value.
By the assumption in the theorem, the instantaneous data
throughput of any feasible schedule can never exceed m∗ rm∗ .
This throughput is achieved during the entire duration of the
proposed solution, and the result follows.
The discussion here has a direct practical implication.
Consider a scenario where equal demand transmitters have
similar distances (and hence close-to-uniform channel gains)
to their receivers, and the latter are located close to each other.
For such a case, the above solution could be used to solve the
minimum-length scheduling problem, fast, and thus provide a
good approximate solution to the global optimum of the real
problem.
VI. BASIC S CHEDULING S TRATEGIES
C ONDITIONS

AND

O PTIMALITY

Given that the problem in its general form is hard, we
consider two basic set activation strategies that are the most
simple choices in constructing a scheduling solution. In the
ﬁrst, denoted by H1 , the links are activated one at a time
and so queues are emptied completely separately. That is,
H1 = {{1}, {2}, . . . , {N }}. The second denoted by HN , follows the very opposite philosophy, namely, links are activated
all at once, and the N -links group is served until some of
the queues becomes empty. The next group consists in all the
links having positive remaining demand, and so on.
Note that both strategies produce schedules of size N ,
and hence represent basic solutions (extreme points of the
polytope). Given N out of the 2N − 1 groups, the computing
time of the correct time share (or concluding that the N groups
do not form a feasible schedule) is normally of complexity
O(N 3 ) due to matrix inversion. Solutions of H1 and HN
are simpler to construct, namely, after N calls of function F ,
computing the H1 schedule runs clearly in linear time, whereas
for the HN schedule the computing time is of O(N 2 ).
A. Optimality Conditions for Activating One Link at a Time
Intuitively, strategy H1 is desirable, if the links, when
activated with others, experience signiﬁcant rate reduction. In
following condition, where rii denotes the effective transmit
rate of a link when activated alone, we quantify this notion.

V. S CHEDULING FOR C ARDINALITY-BASED R ATES
We next consider the complexity issue under the more
structured model of cardinality-based rates (i.e. model II).

3

Condition 1. For any group c ∈ H, the sum of the ratios
between the members’ rates in c and their respective rates of
being served individually, is at most 1, that is,
ric
≤ 1, c ∈ H.
r
i∈c ii

Remark 1. Both theorems signiﬁcantly extend previous results
of the optimality characterization of two links [4], [13]. In
fact, for two links, H1 is optimal if Condition 1 holds for
c = {i, j}, otherwise H2 is optimal.
For the case of cardinality-based rates, i.e. when the input
triplet is (N, d, r), the number of inequalities in Condition 1
is reduced to N . This, together with the proof of Theorem 5,
lead to the following corollary.

The above condition is simple in structure. Yet, it is exact
in characterizing the optimality of H1 .
Theorem 5. H1 is optimal if and only if Condition 1 holds.

Corollary 7. The following condition is both sufﬁcient and
necessary for the optimality of H1 in minimum length scheduling with cardinality-based rates.

Proof: Sufﬁciency: Consider the LP formulation (2),
and the base matrix B for the basic solution H1 .
The inverse matrix B −1 is diagonal with diag(B −1 ) =
(1/r11 , . . . , 1/rN N )T . For any non-basic variable xc with
|c | ≥ 2, the reduced cost equals 1 − eT B −1 rc , where rc
denotes the column vector corresponding to xc in (2). This
cost becomes 1− i∈c ric , which is non-negative if Condition
rii
1 holds. Because none of the 2N − N − 1 non-basic variables
have strictly negative reduced cost, H1 is optimal.
Necessity: If Condition 1 does not hold for some group c , the
reduced cost of the corresponding non-basic variable is strictly
negative. Moreover, for H1 , all the basic variables have strictly
positive values. Therefore the LP pivot operation of bringing in
xc into the base is not degenerate, meaning that the objective
function will strictly improve, and the result follows.
Theorem 5 provides a complete answer to the optimality of
H1 . The condition consists of one inequality per group and
from the proof, it is clearly not possible to reduce them.
Consider a pair of links, and relax the necessity requirement.
A simpler sufﬁcient condition to exclude the activation of both
in any group can be formulated if the two links generate high
interference to each other, while their rates are not signiﬁcantly
affected by other simultaneous transmissions.

mrm ≤ r1 , m = 2, . . . , N.
The structure of Condition 2 also simpliﬁes for model II.
In addition, by augmenting the line of arguments in the proof
of Theorem 6, we arrive at a sufﬁcient condition for excluding
the use of any group of a speciﬁc size m.
Corollary 8. For (N, d, r) and a given group size m ∈ [2, N ],
if the following condition holds for any m < m, there is an
optimal schedule that does not use any group of size m.
mrm ≤ m rm .
B. Conditions for Group Augmentation & Optimality
Let us brieﬂy consider when it is preferable to augment
a group. Intuitively, one can expect that a group should be
augmented with one link, if the new resulting joint throughput,
(deﬁned as the amount of data served per time unit), is higher
than that of any combination of activation durations for the
group and the link separately. Conversely, if it is optimal to
activate group c , then the throughput of c , given by i∈c ric ,
can not be achieved by any combined use of its |c | subsets of
size |c | − 1. This insight leads to the following condition.

Condition 2. For a pair of links i, j ∈ N , we assume the
following inequality.
ri,{i,j}
rj,{i,j}
+
≤ 1.
ri,N \{j}
rj,N \{i}

Condition 3. Given group c , let n = |c | and denote by
c˘ , c˘ , . . . , cn its n subsets of cardinality n − 1, obtained
˘
1 2
by respectively removing from c links 1, 2, . . . , n. Denote by
n
n
rc ∈ R+ the vector of rates of the links in c , and r˘ ∈ R+
i
the corresponding rate vector for c˘ (with zero rate for i).
i
We consider the following condition, which we call condition
3: For any λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn )T ∈ Rn with eT λ = 1,
+
i∈c λi r˘ ≤ rc in at least one link.
i

Theorem 6. If Condition 2 is true, then there exists H∗ in
which i and j do not appear together in any group, that
is, in optimizing the schedule, the condition is sufﬁcient for
discarding any group containing both i and j.
Proof: Suppose an optimal schedule has a group c having
both i and j. Without loss of generality, assume the duration
of c is 1. The demands served equal ric and rj c for the
two links, respectively. By the property of augmentation-rate
monotonicity, ric ≤ ri,{i,j} and rj c ≤ ri,{i,j} , giving the
following inequality.
ric
rj c
+
≤ 1.
ri,N \{j}
rj,N \{i}

Remark 2. Note that ﬁnding whether or not there exists a λ
vector that violates the condition can be formulated as an LP
of size O(n), Thus the condition can be checked efﬁciently for
any given group.
What the above condition states is, in fact, that the rate
vector of c can not be outperformed by the throughput region
of the n sub-groups. If group c is active at optimum, then the
condition must be true, as formulated below.

Consider, instead of c , two groups c \ {j} and c \ {i}. The
rates of i and j are at least ri,N \{j} and rj,N \{i} , respectively.
Activating the two groups for time durations ric /ri,N \{j} and
rj c /rj,N \{i} respectively delivers no less than ric and rj c as
served demands for i and j, hence the conclusion.

c ∈ H∗ , then Condition 3 holds.
Suppose group c is activated for any

Theorem 9. If

Proof:
positive
time t. Strict inequality
λi r˘ > rc in all the n elei∈c
i
ments means that running c˘ , c˘ , . . . , cn , with time proportions
˘
1 2

4

λi , i = 1, . . . , n, respectively, will serve demand trc within
less time than t, and the result follows.

Moreover, one can show that the dual solution derived from
these constraints together with the HN solution satisfy the
complementarity slackness condition.

C. Optimality Conditions for Activating All Links with Positive
Demand Together

VII. D ISCUSSION
We addressed the problem of obtaining a schedule for
activating subsets of N links to empty their transmitter queues
in minimum time. We approached the problem introducing
a modeling which provides ﬂexibility on the transmission
rates used. The rate functions may vary from the asymptotic maximum ones, approaching the capacity region, to
lower achievable rates that correspond to suboptimal detector
structures. We proved that the problem is N P-hard for all
reasonable continuous rate functions. We obtained sufﬁcient
and/or necessary conditions for optimality in a number of
special cases, depending on the relative values of the rates.
We have also established that the optimal schedule need not
consist of more than N subset activation frames.
In view of the complexity result in Section IV, one can
hardly expect an algorithm that is both fast and achieving
global optimality under model I. Still, the closed-form result of
4, gives us a good reason to further investigate the tractability
of the general case in model II. Furthermore, we are working towards a broad algorithmic framework which provides
ﬂexibility by a modular algorithmic design for the problem.

We now turn our attention to scheduling strategy HN . In
the solution, the N groups, which are easily identiﬁed, are of
sizes N, N − 1, . . . , 1. Without loss of generality, assume link
1 has its queue emptied ﬁrst, followed by link 2 in the second
group, and so on. Applying Theorem 9 gives immediately the
following necessary condition for the optimality of HN .
Corollary 10. If HN is optimal, then Condition 3 must be
true for the N − 1 groups {1, . . . , N }, {2, . . . , N }, . . . , and
{N − 1, N }.
Consider the implication of Condition 3 for cardinalitybased rates (N, d, r), i.e. model II. Because of the rate
symmetry, i∈c λi r˘ can attain maximum simultaneously in
i
1
all the n elements, only if λi = n for all i = 1, . . . , n. For
this λ, all elements of i∈c λi r˘ equal n−1 rn−1 , resulting in
i
n
the observation below.
Corollary 11. If HN is optimal for (N, d, r), then the
following relation must hold.
(m − 1)rm−1 ≤ mrm , m = 2, . . . , N.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by: the EU FP7
IAPP@RANPLAN Marie Curie project, ELLIIT project 1.2,
CENIIT project 08.01, VR Grant B0581701, MURI grant
W911NF-08-1-0238, NSF grant CCF-0728966, and ONR
grant N000141110127.

The inequalities in the above corollary form a hierarchy of
relations with a clear interpretation. Namely, if HN is optimal,
then the throughput must be monotonically increasing in group
size. Conversely, if this monotonicity is violated, we conclude
HN is not optimal. However, the reverse formulation does
not hold, i.e., the hierarchy of relations is not sufﬁcient for
ensuring that HN is optimal.
To arrive at a sufﬁcient optimality condition for strategy
HN for the general problem setting (N, d, F ), we consider
max
maximum and minimum rates of groups. Denote by rm
min
and rm the maximum and minimum link rates, respectively,
of all groups of size m. Although the exact values of them
are difﬁcult to calculate in general, in practical systems it
is typically possible to derive optimistic, albeit conservative,
bounds on the rates, using the function F and the channel
matrix G, as replacements of the maximum and minimum
values.

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Andrews and M. Dinitz. Maximizing capacity in arbitrary wireless
networks in the SINR model: complexity and game theory. In Proc. of
IEEE INFOCOM ’09, 2009.
[2] P. Bj¨ rklund, P. V¨ rbrand, and D. Yuan. Resource optimization of spatial
o
a
TDMA in ad hoc radio networks: a column generation approach. In Proc.
of IEEE INFOCOM ’03, 2003.
[3] P. Bj¨ rklund, P. V¨ rbrand, and D. Yuan. A column generation method
o
a
for spatial TDMA scheduling in ad hoc networks. Ad Hoc Networks,
2:405-418, 2004.
[4] S. A. Borbash and A. Ephremides. The feasibility of matchings in a
wireless network IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 52:2749–2755, 2006.
[5] S. A. Borbash and A. Ephremides. Wireless link scheduling with power
control and SINR constraints. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 52:5106–5111,
2006.
[6] C. Boyac´ , B. Li, and Y. Xia. An investigation on the nature of wireless
y
scheduling. In Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM ’10, 2010.
[7] O. Goussevskaia, Y. A. Oswald, and R. Wattenhofer. Complexity in
geometric SINR. In Proc. of ACM MobiHoc ’07, 2007.
[8] B. Hajek and G. Sasaki, Link scheduling in polynomial time, IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, 34:910–917, 1988.
[9] S. Kompella, J. E. Wieselthier, A. Ephremides, H. D. Sherali, and
G. D. Nguyen. On Optimal SINR-Based Scheduling in Multihop Wireless
Networks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 18:1713–1724, 2010.
[10] C. Lund and M. Yannakakis. On the hardness of approximating
minimization problems. Journal of the ACM, 41:960–981, 1994.
[11] K. G. Murty. Linear Programming, Wiley, 1983.
[12] A. Pantelidou and A. Ephremides. Minimum schedule lengths with rate
control in wireless networks. In Proc. of IEEE MILCOM ’08, 2008.
[13] A. Pantelidou and A. Ephremides. A Cross-Layer View of Optimal
Scheduling. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 56:5568-5580, 2010.

Condition 4. We deﬁne the following N − 1 inequalities, with
min
the convention that r0
is treated as a huge number.
1
1
2
+ min ≤ max , m = 2, . . . , N.
min
rm
rm−1
rm−2
The inequalities in Condition 4 form a chain for group sizes
moving from one to N . This chain of relations is sufﬁcient
for the optimality of schedule H N , namely we can show that,
Theorem 12. If Condition 4 holds, then HN is optimal.
We provide an outline, but due to space limitations we omit
the proof details. For the groups in HN , we can prove that the
corresponding N constraints in the LP dual are all binding.

5

