Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.18:1302
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 13:13:29 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:55:57 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      345422 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569555999

On Generalized EXIT Charts of LDPC Code
Ensembles over Binary-Input Output-Symmetric
Memoryless Channels
H. Mamani1 , H. Saeedi1 , A. Eslami2 and H. Pishro-Nik2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA
Email:{hsaeedi}@modares.ac.ir
1

2

asymptotic analysis tools such as density evolution (DE) [2] to
analyze and design LDPC code ensembles with performance
approaching the capacity.
In density evolution technique, assuming that the all-one
codeword is transmitted and starting from initial channel
density, the evolution of this density is tracked throughout
the iterations. At each iteration, the probability of error is
computed for the density. This is deﬁned as the probability
that the value of the random variable corresponding to the
density is negative. Depending on the initial density, which
itself directly depends on the channel parameter,1 two cases
can happen. The probability of error of the evolving density
either tends to zero (DE converges) or is bounded away from
zero after inﬁnite number of iterations. It can be proved that for
a large set of channel types including Binary Erasure Channel
(BEC), Binary Symmetric Channel (BSC) and Binary Input
Additive White Gaussian Noise (BIAWGN) channel, there is
a boundary value on the channel parameter such that if the
channel parameter is less than that value, the DE converges
and if it is more, DE does not converge. We call this boundary
value the threshold of the ensemble over the given channel [2].
It can be seen that in each iteration of the DE, a possibly
large set of values representing the density, should be updated
which can be computationally expensive, especially when DE
is used to design ensembles. Consequently, many approximation tools and techniques have been developed to reduce
the complexity of DE, such as Extrinsic Information Transfer
(EXIT) charts [7] and Gaussian approximation [8]. The aim of
all these methods is to map a given density to a scalar. This
not only reduces the complexity, but also provides a better
insight into the dynamic of iterative decoding. Concentrating
now on the EXIT chart method, it can be shown that for the
BEC, EXIT chart is not an approximation to DE anymore
and is actually able to provide exactly the same threshold
predicted by DE. Moreover, an area theorem is proved for the
EXIT charts of the BEC indicating that the area between the
EXIT curve of variable node and inverse EXIT curve of check
node can be translated into the distance to capacity. In other

Abstract—Generalized Extrinsic Information Transfer
(GEXIT) charts were introduced as an extension of EXIT charts
which have an extensive use in analysis and design of many
iterative schemes including Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC)
codes. While a powerful as well as an insightful concept, their
full potential as a designing tool for LDPC code ensembles has
not been realized due to some missing steps. This papers aims
at ﬁlling these gaps by proving some important properties of
GEXIT charts and using them to design capacity-approaching
LDPC code ensembles. The primary results on GEXIT charts are
limited to regular variable and check node degrees. Moreover,
variable node GEXIT curves have only been derived for the
case where no physical channel is present. In a recent paper,
GEXIT curves for irregular variable node and check node
degree distributions have been derived. In this paper, we derive
GEXIT charts of LDPC code ensembles over binary-input
output-symmetric memoryless channels with any channel
parameter. For the case of binary symmetric channel, we derive
closed form expression for the GEXIT curve of variable nodes.
We also propose to use an alternative representation of GEXIT
charts in which we plot the inverse of variable node GEXIT
curve together with dual GEXIT curve of the check node. We
prove that the area theorem still holds in this case. Using these
results, we analyze and design capacity-approaching LDPC
codes using GEXIT charts.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have been an
active area of research in the past decade due to their good
performance under iterative message passing algorithms [1].
For regular LDPC codes, there is a ﬁxed but different number
of ones in each column and row of the parity check matrix.
This constraint makes it impossible to design codes with
performance approaching the channel capacity [2], [3], [4].
Therefore, irregular LDPC codes were introduced [5] for
which this constraint is not enforced any more. In both cases,
the number of ones is in such a way that the parity check
matrix is sparse, i.e. the density of ones is low.
For large block sizes, the ensembles of LDPC codes
are considered and presented by their degree distribution
pairs (λ(x), ρ(x)). Concentration results [2], [6] indicate that
for sufﬁciently large block lengths, the performance of any
ensemble over a binary-input output-symmetric memoryless
(BIOSM) channel tends to the average performance of the
ensembles. This important result makes it possible to use

1 In this paper we consider channels that are parameterized by one variable
such as ϵ and we assume that the quality of channel degrades as ϵ increases.

1

words, to obtain capacity achieving codes over the BEC, it is
enough to ﬁnd a degree distribution for which the area between
the curves tends to zero. This situation is called matching
condition. This is consistent with the previously obtained
results by Shokrollahi [9], and also in [10], known as ﬂatness
condition, used to design capacity achieving sequences for the
erasure channel. Unfortunately, such an area theorem does not
hold for the EXIT charts of other channels. Consequently,
EXIT charts can not be used to design provably capacity
achieving sequences of LDPC code ensembles over general
BIOSM channels.
Recently, a new tool named Generalized EXIT (GEXIT)
chart has been proposed in [11]. In this tool, similar to EXIT
charts, intermediate densities in DE are mapped to a scalar.
However, the mapping has been cleverly deﬁned such that
the resulting curves for variable and check nodes of a regular
LDPC code ensemble fulﬁll the area property. This suggests
that GEXIT charts have the potential to be used in designing
capacity achieving sequences for channels other than the BEC.
In [11], the GEXIT curves have only been obtained for
regular LDPC code ensembles. Moreover, it is assumed that
the (physical) channel parameter takes its largest possible
value (worst channel quality). This in fact makes the computed
curve independent of the channel parameter. This is equivalent to the assumption that no physical channel is present.
Consequently, the full potential of GEXIT charts in designing
capacity achieving sequences of LDPC code ensembles has not
been realized. In a recent paper [12], an analytical relationship
between the GEXIT curves of irregular variable and check
node degrees, and that of regular variable node and check node
degrees is obtained. It is shown that this relationship is similar
to the one that exists between the EXIT curve of regular and
irregular variable and check node degrees.
In this paper, we develop GEXIT curves of variable nodes
for any given channel parameter. Using this result and through
a tedious derivation, we obtain a closed form formulation
for the GEXIT curves of variable nodes over the BSC. It is
important to note that in [11], the matching condition for a
given ensemble has been suggested to hold for check node
GEXIT curve and the inverse of the so called dual GEXIT
curve of the variable node. However, taking the channel
parameter into account, it might not be as easy to obtain a
closed form formulation for the dual GEXIT curve of the
variable node. In order to employ our obtained formulation
for variable node GEXIT curve in the analysis and design of
codes, we prove that similar matching results hold for dual
GEXIT curve of the check node and the inverse of variable
node GEXIT curve. Using these results, we analyze and design
capacity-approaching LDPC codes using GEXIT charts.
The organization of the paper is as follows. In the next
section, some deﬁnitions and notations are reviewed. In Section III, we develop the GEXIT curve of variable nodes for
an arbitrary channel parameter. In particular, closed form
formulation for the GEXIT curve of variable nodes of the
BSC is derived. In section IV, alternative representation of
matching condition is proposed. In Section V, some examples

on analysis and design of capacity approaching codes in BSC
and BIAWGN channels are proposed. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper. The details of derivations and proof of
propositions have been omitted due to lack of space.
II. R EVIEW AND N OTATIONS
A. Ensembles of LDPC Codes
An LDPC code ensemble is represented by its degree
∑Dv
∑Dc
i−1
i−1
distributions λ(x) =
, ρ(x) =
,
i=2 λi x
i=2 ρi x
where λi and ρi represent the fraction of edges emanating from
variable and check nodes of degree i, respectively. Moreover
Dv and Dc represent the maximum variable and check node
degrees. The rate of the ensemble, R(λ, ρ), can be computed
as:
∫1
∑Dc ρi
ρ(x)dx
i=2 i
0
= 1 − ∑Dv λ .
R(λ, ρ) = 1 − ∫ 1
i
λ(x)dx
i=2 i
0
B. Notations
It is assumed that all channels considered in this paper are
Binary-Input, Output-Symmetric and Memoryless (BIOSM).
Instead of considering a single BIOSM channel, families
of BIOSM channels parameterized by a real-valued parameter such as ϵ are usually considered and are denoted by
BIOSM(ϵ). If X = {±1} denotes the channel input alphabet
and Y denotes channel output alphabet, then the channel can
be characterized by its transition probability density PY|X (y|x).
Throughout the paper, we consider the probability distributions of extrinsic log-likelihood ratios (L-densities). For
example L-densities for BEC(p), BSC(δ) and BIAWGN(σ) are
as follows:
cBEC(p) (y)
p

=

p △0 (y) + (1 − p) △∞ (y),

BSC(δ)
cδ
(y)

=

cBIAW GN (σ) (y)
σ

=

δ △− log 1−δ (y) + (1 − δ) △log 1−δ (y),
δ
δ
(y−2/σ 2 )2
√ 2
− 8/σ2
(σ /8π)e
.

Note that for simplicity, we may parameterize a BIAWGN
channel with the mean of its Gaussian L-density, q, i.e.,
BIAWGN(q) where q = 2/σ 2 .
It is shown in [6] that if c(y) is an L-density, it has the symmetry property, i.e., c(−y) = c(y). exp(−y). Consequently, its
entropy can be obtained using the following formula:
∫ ∞
H(c) =
c(y) log2 (1 + e−y )dy.
−∞

C. Deﬁnition of GEXIT Function
Let X be a vector of length n. Let the channel from X
to Y be memoryless, where Yi is the result of passing Xi
through the channel. Assume that all individual channels are
parameterized in a smooth way by a common parameter ϵ,
i.e., ϵi = ϵi (ϵ), i ∈ [n]. Let Ω be a further observation of X
so that pΩ|X,Y (ω|x, y) = pΩ|X (ω|x). Then the ith and the
average GEXIT function satisfying the general area theorem
are deﬁned by [11]:
gi (ϵ) =

2

∂H(Xi |Y, Ω) dϵi
,
∂ϵi
dϵ

channel with parameter q denoted by its L-density bq (y) is
represented as:
gi (ϵ) =
∫ ∫ ∫
(
)
∂cϵ (ω)
× log2 1 + e−z−y−ω dydωdz,
aϵ (z)bq (y) i
∂ϵ
z ω y
(6)

and
n
n
1 ∑ ∂H(Xi |Y, Ω) dϵi
1∑
g(ϵ) =
=
gi (ϵ),
n i=1
∂ϵi
dϵ
n i=1

(1)

respectively.
Based on the results of [11], given two families of Ldensities {cϵi } and {aϵ } parameterized by ϵ, the GEXIT
function can be represented as follows:2
∫ ∫
∂c (ω)
aϵ (z) ϵi
× log2 (1 + e−z−ω ) dωdz
∂ϵ
G(cϵi , aϵ ) = z w ∫ ∂c (ω)
,
ϵi
× log2 (1 + e−ω ) dω
∂ϵ
w
(2)
and the GEXIT kernel is deﬁned as:
∫ ∂cϵi
× log2 (1 + e−z−w )dω
cϵi
l (z) = ω ∂ϵ ϵ
.
(3)
∫ ∂c i
−w )dω
∂ϵ × log2 (1 + e
ω

where in (6), aϵ (z) denotes extrinsic L-density, and cϵ (ω)
represents ith extrinsic channel L-density. Normalized GEXIT
function is deﬁned as follows similar to (2):
∫ ∫ ∫
∂c (ω)
× log2 (1 + e−z−y−ω ) dydωdz
a (z)bq (y) ϵi
∂ϵ
z ω y ϵ
.
∫ ∂cϵi (ω)
× log2 (1 + e−ω ) dω
∂ϵ
ω
(7)
Note that if in the above formulation we set bq (y) to ∆0 , the
equation is reduced to (2).

Consequently, the GEXIT curve is given in parametric form
by {H(cϵi ), G(cϵi , aϵ )}, where
∫ ∞
H(cϵi ) =
cϵi (ω) log(1 + e−ω )dω.

Example 1 (Variable node GEXIT curve in the BEC): For
variable node of degree dv and transmission over BEC(p),
from equation (7) by substituting the values of L-densities
from Table I and evaluating the integrals we can see that
parameterized GEXIT curve is given by:

−∞

D. Dual GEXIT Curve
Let GEXIT curve be given in the parametric form by
{H(cϵi ), G(cϵi , aϵ )}. According to [11] dual GEXIT curve
is deﬁned in parametric form as {G(aϵ , cϵi ), H(aϵ )}, where
∫ ∫
ϵ (z)
cϵi (ω) ∂a∂ϵ × log2 (1 + e−z−ω ) dωdz
G(aϵ , cϵi ) = z w ∫ ∂a (z)
,
ϵ
× log2 (1 + e−z ) dz
∂ϵ
z
(4)
and
∫ ∞
H(aϵ ) =
aϵ (z) log(1 + e−z )dz.
(5)

{H(cϵ ), G(cϵ (ω), bp (y), aϵ (z))} = {ϵ, p ϵdv−1 },

(8)

which is the same as EXIT curve.
TABLE I
VARIABLE N ODE L- DENSITIES IN BEC( P )
L-densities

In [7], EXIT chart for a given LDPC code ensemble is
realized if we plot the EXIT curve of variable node against
the inverse of check node. Similar concept can be used for
GEXIT curves. In particular, in [11], GEXIT chart is realized
by plotting inverse of dual GEXIT curve of variable node
against the GEXIT curve of check node.

ϵdv−1 △0 (z) + 1 − ϵdv−1 △∞ (z).

bp (y)

E. GEXIT Charts

ϵ △0 (ω) + (1 − ϵ) △∞ (ω).

aϵ (z)

−∞

Value

cϵ (ω)

p △0 (y) + (1 − p) △∞ (y).

B. Derivation of GEXIT Function for the BSC
In this subsection, we use the result of last subsection to
obtain the closed form relationship for the GEXIT function of
variable nodes for the BSC.
Proposition 2: For a variable node of degree dv and transmission over BSC(δ), the closed form GEXIT function gi (ϵ) is
given by
(
)
v −1
∑ d∑
dv − 1
j
ε (1 − ε) dv −1−i ×
i
j=±1
i=0
(
(
)(dv −1−2i)−j )
ε
{δ log2 1 + 1−δ 1−ε
δ
(
(
)(dv −1−2i)−j )
δ
ε
+ (1 − δ) log2 1 + 1−δ 1−ε
)(dv −1−2i)
(
j−1
−j−1
1
ε
+ε( 2 ) (1 − ε)( 2 ) 1−ε
ln 2 ×
(
)
δ
+ 1−δ ε1−δ v −1−2i)−j }.
(d −1−2i)−j
(d
δ
ε
1+ 1−δ ( 1−ε ) v
1+ δ ( 1−ε )
(9)

III. D ERIVATION OF VARIABLE N ODE GEXIT F UNCTION
FOR AN A RBITRARY C HANNEL PARAMETER
A. General Case
As discussed in Section I, variable node GEXIT functions
have been obtained in [11] assuming that no physical channel
is present or equivalently, the channel parameter has been
set to its worst value. Consequently, Equation (2) has been
derived based on such an assumption. In the following
proposition, we have derived a formulation similar to (2)
using (1) for an arbitrary channel parameter.
Proposition 1: The GEXIT function gi (ϵ) over a BIOSM
2 Throughout the paper, we may drop the integral limits for more clarity. In
such cases, the integral limits are assumed to be −∞ and ∞ unless otherwise
stated.

3

do not cross and faithfully represent density evolution. Moreover, the area ∫
under the dual GEXIT curve of check node is
equal to 1 − ρ and the area to the left of ∫ inverse of
the
variable node GEXIT curve is equal to H(c) λ. It follows
that R(λ, ρ) ≤ 1 − H(c) and the equality holds (we achieve
the capacity) if the the two curves match.

C. GEXIT Chart for the BIAWGN Channel
In the case of the BIAWGN channel, there is no closed
form formula for GEXIT function and calculation of GEXIT
function can be done only by numerical methods. Since in
[11] the formulations of GEXIT function of variable nodes
have been obtained in the absence of physical channel, in
this subsection we derive the formulations in the presence of
physical channel where the physical channel is BIAWGN(q).
Using an approach similar to [11], Equation (6) is modiﬁed
to
∫ ∫
aϵ (z)bq (y)lcϵ (z, y) dy dz,
gi (ϵ) =
z

V. S OME E XAMPLES ON GEXIT C HARTS FOR BSC
BIAWGN C HANNELS

AND

In previous sections, we obtained formulations for the
GEXIT curves of irregular check node and variable node
degrees for any given physical channel parameter. Moreover,
we introduced a new representation of GEXIT charts in which
the check node dual GEXIT curve can be plotted against the
inverse of variable node GEXIT curve. This makes it possible
to verify the matching condition for irregular LDPC code
ensembles and design irregular ensembles. These facts are
examined in this section through some examples.

y

cϵ

where l (z, y) is the GEXIT kernel given in [11].
We now propose the following proposition which gives a
closed form equation for the starting point of the variable
node GEXIT curve over the BIAWGN channel.
Proposition 3: Let gi (ϵ) be the variable node GEXIT
function over BIAWGN(q). Then
∫ ∞
(y− q)2
2
e−2y
lim gi (ϵ) = √
e− 4 q
dy.
ϵ→0
π q −∞
(1 + e−y )2

Example 2 ((3, 6) ensemble and transmission over the
BSC):
Consider a (3, 6) regular ensemble and transmission over
BSC(0.07). The corresponding GEXIT chart is shown in
Fig. 1 where dashed and solid curves correspond to the dual
GEXIT curve of check node and inverse GEXIT curve of
variable node, respectively4 . Note that as opposed to variable
node GEXIT curves in [11], the starting point of the dashed
curve is not at coordinates (1,1) and depends on the channel
parameter. As can be seen, the two curves do not match
which is expected as the ensemble is regular.

IV. A LTERNATIVE R EPRESENTATION OF GEXIT C HART
In this section we propose a new representation of GEXIT
chart which is slightly different from [11]. Consider a degree
distribution pair (λ, ρ) and transmission over BIOSM channel
characterized by its L-density c so that density evolution
∞
converges to △∞ . Let {aα }∞
α=−1 and {bα }α=0 denote the
3
interpolated families . We remind that according to Lemma
17 in [11], the following two GEXIT curves do not cross and
faithfully represent density evolution:
-GEXIT curve of check nodes:
{H(aα ), G(aα , bα+1 )},
-Inverse of dual GEXIT curve of variable nodes:
{H(aα ), G(aα , bα )}.
Now if we replace GEXIT curve of check node by dual
GEXIT curve of check node and also replace the inverse
dual GEXIT curve of variable node by inverse of GEXIT
curve of variable node, we can state the following proposition:

Fig. 1. GEXIT Chart for (3, 6) regular LDPC code ensemble for BSC(0.07).

Proposition 4: Consider a degree distribution pair (λ, ρ) and
transmission over a BIOSM channel characterized by its
L-density c so that density evolution converges to △∞ . Let
∞
{aα }∞
α=−1 and {bα }α=0 denote the interpolated families as
deﬁned in [11]. Then the two following curves parameterized
by:

Example 3 (Capacity approaching LDPC code ensemble
over the BSC): The Shannon limit for the BSC and rate
one-half is δopt = 0.110028. The designed ensemble whose
degree distribution can be found in [2] has a threshold equal
to δ ∗ = 0.106 which is pretty close to the Shannon limit. In
Fig. 2, the corresponding GEXIT chart is plotted. As can be
seen, the matching condition holds in this case.

{G(bα+1 , aα ), H(bα+1 )}, dual of check node,
{G(bα , aα ), H(bα )}, inverse of variable node,
3 According

(10)

Example 4 (Irregular ensemble over the BIAWGN channel):
4 We

to Deﬁnition 9 in [11].

4

maintain the same settings for the curves in the rest of ﬁgures.

Fig. 2.

physical channel. In this paper, we derived GEXIT curves
of variable nodes over BIOSM channels for any arbitrary
channel parameter. We then derived a closed form formula
for the GEXIT curves of variable nodes over the BSC. The
matching condition in [11] has been proved to hold for the
check node GEXIT curve and the inverse of dual GEXIT curve
of the variable node. To be able to use the GEXIT curve
of variable nodes instead of dual GEXIT curve of variable
nodes, we proved that similar matching results hold for dual
GEXIT curve of the check node and the inverse of variable
node GEXIT curve. Putting our results together with the one
in [12] on irregular codes, we were able to plot the GEXIT
chart of any given irregular ensemble for any arbitrary channel
parameter. In particular, we plotted the GEXIT chart for
capacity approaching ensembles over the BSC and BIAWGN
channel and veriﬁed that matching condition holds in that case.
It is important to note that using GEXIT charts, the problem
of designing LDPC code ensembles is in fact reduced to a
linear programming optimization problem. Consequently, the
proposed result on GEXIT charts was used to design a capacity
approaching ensemble over the BIAWGN channel.

GEXIT Chart for an irregular LDPC code ensemble over the BSC.

In Fig. 3, GEXIT chart for a highly irregular LDPC code
ensemble with maximum variable node degree of 20 taken
from Table II of [2] has been plotted. As can be seen,
the curves almost completely match showing that the code
preforms very closely to capacity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Iran Telecommunication Research Center (ITRC) under project number 19-01-04.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of CapacityApproaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb 2001.
[3] H. Saeedi, H. Pishro-Nik and A. H. Banihashemi,“On systematic deFig. 3. GEXIT Chart of an irregular LDPC code ensemble with Dv = 20
sign of universally capacity approaching rate-compatible sequences of
in BIAWGN channel. in BIAWGNC
LDPC code ensembles over binary-input output-symmetric memoryless
channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 59, no. 7, pp.
1807-1819, July 2011.
[4] H. Saeedi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Systematic Design of LDPC Codes
Example 5 (Code design using GEXIT chart for Dv =20
over Binary Erasure Channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 58, pp. 118-127, Jan. 2010.
over the BIAWGN channel):
In this example, we design a degree distribution with rate [5] H. M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief
one half and Dv = 20. To be able to compare the result with
propagation,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information
Theory, Cambridge, MA, Oct. 1998, p. 117.
Example 4, we use the same check node degree distribution
as that of Example 4. Using the formulation for GEXIT curve [6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
over the BIAWGN channel in Section III.C, we were able to [7] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel property,” IEEE Transactions
design the following degree distribution:
on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657-2673, Nov. 2004.
2
3
4
[8] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of
λ(x) = 0.2300 x + 0.2102 x + 0.0245 x + 0.0020 x
sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian
+ 0.0954 x5 + 0.0631 x6 + 0.0488 x7 + 0.0185 x8
approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no.
2, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001.
+ 0.0395 x18 + 0.2680 x19 ,
[9] Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the era7
8
9
sure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, no. 12,
ρ(x) = 0.64854 x + 0.34747 x + 0.00399 x .
pp. 3017-3028, Dec. 2002.
The threshold of this rate one half ensemble is 0.3004 dB [10] H. Saeedi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New Sequences of Capacity
Achieving LDPC Code Ensembles over Binary Erasure Channels,” IEEE
which is .01dB better than 0.3104 dB, the threshold of the
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, pp. 6332 - 6346, Dec. 2010.
ensemble in Example 4 designed in [2]. These thresholds are [11] C. Masson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “The Generalized Area Theorem and Some of its Consequences,” IEEE Transactions
less than 0.12 dB away from the Shannon limit.
on Information Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, Nov 2009.
[12] H. Mamani and H. Saeedi, “Generalized EXIT Charts for Irregular
VI. C ONCLUSION
LDPC Codes,” in proc. 1st Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelelgense and
Primary results on GEXIT charts are limited to regular
Signal Processing, Sharif Uinversity of Technology, Tehran, Iran, June
2011.
check node and variable node degrees in the absence of

5

