Title:          greedy_energy_isit2.dvi
Creator:        dvips(k) 5.991 Copyright 2011 Radical Eye Software
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 22:21:50 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:40 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      305412 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566975

Energy Efﬁcient Greedy Link Scheduling and
Power Control in wireless networks
∗ Arun

Sridharan, † Changhee Joo, and ∗ C. Emre Koksal
† School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
Columbus, Ohio 43210
Ulsan, South Korea 330-708
{sridhara,koksal}@ece.osu.edu
cjoo@unist.ac.kr

∗ Department

transmission power are imposed, a link scheduler could end
up expending more average power than necessary, even when
the arrival rate is admissible, as seen from the following
example: Consider the case of transmission over a single
link where one is allowed to either transmit 2 packets in
a time slot by expending 2 units of power, or 1 packet in
a time slot by expending 0.75 units of power. Suppose the
arrival process is such that two packets arrive at the start
of every odd numbered time slot. The link scheduler would
cause the link to transmit whenever there are packets in the
queue, i.e., every other time slot, consequently requiring an
average power of 1 unit. If the average power constraint
was less than one units, the link scheduler would be unable
to meet the power constraint, whereas by transmitting one
packet in each time slot one would consume a lesser average
power of 0.75 units and yet guarantee the same throughput.
The same limitations of the link scheduler carries over to
the scenario in which multiple interfering links are present.
Thus, link scheduling needs to be combined with an effective
power control strategy in order to ensure that the largest set
of admissible arrival rates can be stabilized while meeting
average energy requirements. The optimal link scheduling and
power control policy, proposed in [3] however, suffers from
high computation complexity, which is also one of the main
challenges in optimal link scheduling. It is thus natural to ask
if one can design low-complexity link scheduling and power
control policies, motivated by the study of low-complexity
link schedulers. In this context, our contribution is that we
extend the scope of greedy schedulers such as Longest-QueueFirst and Greedy Maximal Scheduling [10] to handle energy
constraints in wireless networks. Our link scheduling and
power control policy, GECS, is based on properties of both
greedy schedulers as well as optimal schedulers. Interestingly,
we are able to characterize the performance of GECS in terms
of the LPF of a network graph, a parameter that has been used
to characterize the performance of GMS in wireless networks.
Previous studies have focused on energy efﬁciency in a
particular aspect of network control, (e.g., Energy efﬁcient
routing, or energy efﬁcient MAC protocols) as well as over
control decisions spread across the network layers; For instance, [1] and [2] consider the problem of joint routing,
scheduling and power control in wireless networks. In [1],
the authors develop a power control and link scheduling policy

Abstract—We consider the problem of joint link scheduling and
power control for wireless networks with average transmission
power constraints. Due to the high computational complexity
of the optimal policies, we extend the class of greedy link
scheduling policies to handle average power constraints. We
develop a greedy link scheduling and power control scheme
GECS, with provable performance guarantees. We show that the
performance of our greedy scheduler can be characterized using
the Local Pooling Factor (LPF) of a network graph, which has
been previously used to characterize the stability of the Greedy
Maximal Scheduling (GMS) policy for wireless networks. We
also simulate the performance of GECS on wireless network,
and compare its performance to another candidate greedy link
scheduling and power control policy.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Energy efﬁcient networking principles have received signiﬁcant attention in the recent past. Network devices are often provisioned with multiple transmit power levels, but are limited by
peak as well as average energy constraints. These constraints
are determined by factors such as ampliﬁer characteristics,
energy costs and battery limitations. Consequently, one needs
efﬁcient control strategies aimed at achieving different performance objectives such as maximizing network lifetime, or
maximizing network throughput while satisfying the energy
constraints for the network. Conversely, in many scenarios, one
wants to guarantee a certain network throughput region, while
minimizing long term average energy expended to sustain any
admissible arrival rate. In this paper, we consider the problem
of link scheduling over a wireless network in the presence of
average energy constraints. Owing to the high computational
complexity of the optimal policy, we propose low complexity
energy efﬁcient link scheduling and power control policies.
We exploit the property of Longest Queue First (LQF)-based
algorithms to develop a low-complexity greedy power control
and scheduling scheme (GECS) for wireless networks under
binary interference models. We then analyze its performance
in wireless networks and show that their performance can be
characterized using the LPF Of a wireless network. We thus
show that the LPF can be used to characterize the performance
of cross-layer schemes, spanning multiple layers.
A link scheduler selects a non-interfering subset of links in
a wireless network to schedule at every instance. A throughput optimal link scheduler is one that keeps the queues in
the network stable for the largest set of admissible arrival
rates for that network. However, when constraints on average

1

that minimizes total average power, while satisfying minimum
rate constraints over each link. The optimal policy has high
computational complexity, exponential in general. The model
moreover does not consider the stochasticity of arrivals and
dynamic queue control. In [2], the authors provide a low
complexity approximation algorithm to solve the joint routing,
scheduling and power control problem in wireless networks
under a node-exclusive interference model.
While the above network optimization problems assume
that the long term average rate constraints are known, this is
not true in general. Stochastic network optimization considers
the problem of dynamic queue control in the presence of
unknown arrival rates in order to optimize some quantity such
as total average expended power. Stochastic network optimization problems have been addressed using stochastic gradient
techniques ([4], [6]) or Lyapunov optimization techniques [3].
In [3], a Lyapunov drift based optimization technique was
used to obtain asymptotically optimal policies that minimized
the total average power for any arrival rate feasible under
the peak power constraints. Lyapunov based optimization has
also been used in energy constrained scheduling, where the
objective is to maximize the network throughput region (set of
stabilizable arrival rates) subject to average energy constraints.
Subsequently, such techniques have been used in dynamic
channel acquisition and scheduling to minimize energy ([3],
[5]) consumed for transmission as well as channel acquisition,
or to maximize throughput when only limited channel information may be acquired by a link. In all these studies however, the
optimal policy has high computational complexity motivating
the study of low complexity algorithms with good performance
guarantees. While low complexity approximation algorithms
have been proposed in speciﬁc interference models [7], or
for speciﬁc networks [6], ﬁnding a low complexity dynamic
control algorithm with good performance guarantees remains
largely unaddressed.
In the context of link scheduling, the LQF policy, and
its variant Greedy Maximal Scheduling (GMS) have been
analyzed extensively as low-complexity scheduling policy
for wireless networks. The performance of GMS has been
characterized recently using the Local Pooling Factor, a graph
theoretic parameter, and LPF has been studied for a large
class of graphs and interference models [10], [15]. It is thus
beneﬁcial to integrate power control with existing greedy link
scheduling policies. In the next section, we describe the system
model. We then describe and analyze the GECS policy in
Sections II and III respectively.

cmax
1
l2
av
C1

Λ
ΛP av

l1

av
C2 cmax
2
av
Figure 1: Stability region for a two link network graph. C1
av
and C2 represent the maximum admissible arrival rate for
the two links. The stability region ΛP av is the region enclosed
within dotted lines.

from a convex rate-power curve represented by a function
fl (cl ), where fl (cl ) is the power required to transmit at rate
cl . The function fl (cl ) depends on the channel conditions
of link l, which are assumed to be static for the wireless
network. For example, in the case of an AWGN channel with a
bandwidth W , noise spectral density N0 , and a power gain hl „
cl
0
the power consumed for a rate cl is given by NhW 2 W −1
l
(Assuming Gaussian codewords with average power Pl ). The
rates corresponding to the available transmit power levels are
denoted by {c1 , c2 · · · cmax }.
l
l
l
We further assume that each link is also associated with an average power constraint Plav , so that
T
1
lim supT →∞ T t=1 Pl (t) ≤ Plav . We assume that time is
slotted so that Pl (t) is the power consumed during time slot
t. Let Ql denote the queue of link l into which packets arrive
at the beginning of every time slot. Packets arrive into queue
Ql according to an I.I.D. process with ﬁnite mean λl .
For a given vector of transmit powers P (t), let r, {rl =
fl−1 (Pl )} denote the rate allocation vector achieved by using
P (t) in time slot t. We deﬁne a rate allocation vector r as
being feasible if it satisﬁes interference constraints, i.e., r(l) =
0 ⇒ r(k) = 0, ∀k ∈ Il , k = l. Let R = {r | r is feasible} and
P = {P | r deﬁned by rl = fl−1 (Pl ) is feasible} denote the
set of all feasible rate allocation vectors and power allocation
vectors for the network. A scheduling policy π : Q → P
selects a feasible power allocation vector in each time slot t.
Let P av denotes the vector of average power constraints for
all links. The power constrained stability region ΛP av can be
then deﬁned as [3], [16]:
ΛP av = {λ | ∃ P (1), P (2), · · · such that
(1)
T

T

1
1
r(t) ≻ λ and P av
lim
P (t))},
T →∞ T
T →∞ T
t=1
t=1
where ≻ and represent component wise inequalities. Fig. 1
lim

II. S YSTEM M ODEL
We consider a wireless network represented by a network
graph G = (V, E). For simplicity, we initially consider wireless
networks with single-hop trafﬁc, so that each link l is a
source-destination pair. We assume that link l is associated
with interference set Il , so that if link l is active, then no
other link in Il can be active. Every link l is associated
with a peak transmit power constraint. We also assume that a
transmitter can transmit using a discrete set of power levels
{Pl1 , Pl2 · · · Plmax }. These discrete power levels are chosen

shows ΛP av for a simple two link network graph with transmit
power levels Pl = {0, Plmax } l = 1, 2 and average power
constraints Plav < Plmax . Links l1 and l2 are in each other’s
interference sets. Clav denotes the highest admissible arrival
rate for link l. Note that when the available transmit power
ˆ
levels for each link l is increased to Pl = {0, Pl1 , Plmax } ⊃
Pl , l = 1, 2, then the power constrained stability region
increases as well, so that ΛP av ,P ⊆ ΛP av ,P . This follows from
ˆ

2

l2
the convexity of rate-power curve fl (cl ). When the average
l3
l1
power constraint Plav is set to Plmax , then every link l could
max
always transmit at maximum power Pl
when scheduled,
and no power control would be necessary. Otherwise, when
Plmax > P av , then a joint link scheduling and power control
l4
l6
policy is required even when the link channel conditions are
l5
static. We are interested in a joint power control and link
scheduling policy that stabilizes the queues in the network for
Figure 2: Six-cycle network graph
any arrival rate in ΛP av while satisfying the power constraints.
In order to satisfy the average power constraints, we employ
(2) Select the power level as:
virtual power queues for each link, as ﬁrst proposed in [3].
∗
−1
Pm ∈ argmaxPm ∈{Pm ,Pm ···Pm } Qm fm (Pm )−Um Pm .
1
2
max
Every link l keeps a virtual queue Ul that is used to track
−1
∗
the excess power expended beyond the link’s power constraint (3a) The scheduler then sets r(m) = fm (Pm ), and r(k) = 0,
for all k ∈ Im ∩ Z, with k = m.
Plav . The departures from the virtual queue Ul follow an I.I.D.
(3b) Update Z as Z ← Z/Im to remove interfering links.
av
process with mean Pl . The arrivals in each time slot represent
the power expended during that slot. Let Pl (t) be the power (4) If Z = {∅}, then repeat step 1.
In step 1 as well as step 3, the GECS policy breaks ties
which link l transmits during time slot t, then Pl packets are
randomly. Note that step 2 is only performed on links selected
assumed to have arrived at the beginning of time slot t + 1.
The dynamics of the real and virtual queues in each time slot in step 1, and does not increase the computational complexity
of the greedy policy, which is O(|E| log|E|) considering a
are then given by:
av
+
centralized implementation. The following example illustrates
Ul (t + 1) = [Ul (t) − Pl (t)] + Pl (t), and
+
the GECS policy on a 6-cycle network graph under the oneQl (t + 1) = [Ql (t) − Sl (t)] + Al (t).
From Lemma 3 of [3], if the virtual queue Ul is stable, hop interference model.
Example 1. Consider the six cycle graph shown in Fig. 2
then the average power constraint is satisﬁed. An optimal with links l to l . Let the available transmit power levels for
1
6
scheduling policy is one which can stabilize any λ ∈ ΛP av , link l be P ∈ 0, 1. Let the corresponding rates achieved by
l
while ensuring that the power constraints in each link are c ∈ {0, 1}. Suppose at time t, the Q(t) = [2 3 8 5 2 10], and
l
satisﬁed. An optimal scheduling strategy is given in [3] as: U (t) = [1 4 7 5 3 12 ]. Since link l has the highest weight
6
Q2 + Ul2 , GECS selects link l6 ﬁrst. However, in step 3, the
l
argmax
(Ql (t)rl (P (t)) − Ul (t)Pl (t))
(2) transmit power level that maximizes the weight of link l6 is
Pl ,l∈E
l∈E
0. Thus l6 is not scheduled. The next highest weight belongs
The computational complexity of the optimal policy is howto l3 and link l3 is added to the schedule. Under the one-hop
ever, very high, formidably hard with most interference models
interference model, links l2 and l4 are interfering links and
[9]. Indeed, even under the binary interference model, eq. (2)
can not be scheduled. The scheduler then deactivates link l5 ,
describes a Max-weight policy as the solution maximizes
and schedules link l1 . At the end of this procedure, the rate
the sum of weights of each link in the selected transmisallocation vector is r = [1 0 1 0 0 0]. Note that GECS does
sion power vector, where the weight of link l is given by
not necessarily yield a schedule that is a maximal matching
−1
maxPl Ql f (Pl )−Ul Pl . The Max-weight scheduler is known
on the graph G.
to be NP-hard in many cases including K-hop interference
The intuition behind the performance of the GECS schedmodels [9]. This motivates the need for a low complexity
uler can be explained using the properties of the LQF and the
power control and link scheduling policy with good perforoptimal policies. For any arrival rate inside ΛP av , the optimal
mance guarantees.
In the following section, we describe our link scheduling policy causes the drift of a quadratic Lyapunov function to
and power control policy, the Greedy Energy Constrained be negative; LQF policy, on the other hand causes the set of
longest queues to decrease in the ﬂuid limit if the local pooling
Scheduler (GECS).
conditions are satisﬁed [8]. Since GECS combines LQF (for
III. G REEDY E NERGY C ONSTRAINED S CHEDULER
link selection) and the optimal policy (for power control),
(GECS)
one expects GECS to cause the drift of a quadratic function
The GECS scheduler exploits the properties of both LQF as to be negative whenever certain local pooling conditions are
well as Maxweight policies in order to perform link scheduling satisﬁed. This indeed turns out to be the case, although local
and power control. The GECS scheduler ﬁrst greedily selects pooling occurs in a manner different from [8]. Nevertheless,
links, based on the queue weights Q2 + Ul2 . It then assigns the local pooling enables characterizing the performance of
l
power levels optimally to the selected link, by applying the GECS using the LPF. In the next section, we analyze the
optimal power control strategy in (2) as if link l alone is active. performance of GECS and make these relations precise.
This procedure continues until no more links remain to be
IV. P ERFORMANCE C HARACTERIZATION
selected. The GECS scheduler can be formally described as
We analyze the performance of the GECS scheduler by
follows: We ﬁrst initialize the set Z to E.
characterizing its efﬁciency ratio. The efﬁciency ratio of GECS
is deﬁned as the largest fraction of ΛP av , that can be stabilized
(1) Select link m ← argmaxl∈Z {Q2 + Ul2 }.
l

3

4

6

x 10

GECS
GMW

argmaxl∈E {maxPl (Ql f −1 (Pl ) − Ul Pl )}. It then proceeds by
removing interfering links and repeating this process until no
other interfering links remain to be scheduled. Fig. 3 plots
the total queue sizes as the offered load λl in each link is
increased towards its maximum admissible arrival rate. The
available transmit power levels for each link are assumed to be
in the set {0, 1, 3, 7, 15} units. We assume the node exclusive
interference model. The average power constraint for each link
is set at 2.75. The corresponding rates are chosen by assuming
an AWGN channel so that Cl = log(1 + Pl hl /N0 ) where the
path loss hl is arbitrarily chosen for each link but ﬁxed over
the scheduling time-frame. The highest admissible arrival rate
for each link is given by [2 3.5 4.2 5.1 4.7 4]. Since the LPF of
the network graph is 2/3, we expect GECS to simultaneously
schedule one third the maximum admissible arrival rate on
each link l (since by scheduling 3 of the 6 links at a time, half
the maximum admissible arrival rate is admissible for every
link) this is indeed seen to be the case. Although performance
guarantees for the GMW policy have not been analyzed using
the LPF as we did for GECS in the previous section, the plots
show that GECS performs better than GMW at higher loads,
and reduces the average sum queue size by 30-75%. This could
be attributed to the fact that GMW only looks at the difference
in queue weights and may be insensitive to links that have long
queue lengths but with relatively low weight values.
VI. CONCLUSION

sum queue size

5

4

3

2

1

0

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

λl
Figure 3: The performance of GECS and GMW is plotted for
the network graph in Fig. 2
by GECS. We show that the efﬁciency ratio of GECS is can
be related to the LPF of a network graph, which depends on
the topology of the network and the interference model. The
LPF can be deﬁned using the local pooling conditions which
are given below [11]:
Deﬁnition 2. Let L ⊂ E be any subgraph of G. Let sL , where
sL (l) ∈ {0, 1}, ∀l ∈ L be any 1 × |L| link activation vector
with the following properties: (i) sL satisﬁes interference
constraints, and (ii) sL is maximal, i.e., ∃ no l ∈ L with
sL (l) = 0 such that l satisﬁes interference constraints. Let
ML be the set of all such link activation vectors sL . Then,
L satisﬁes σ-local pooling if, for any given pair µ, ν, where µ
and ν are convex combinations of elements in ML , we have
σµ ν. The LPF σ ∗ , for the network is then deﬁned as:
σ ∗ = sup {σ | ∀ L ⊂ G, L satisﬁes σ-local pooling} .

In this paper, we addressed the problem of link scheduling
and power control for wireless networks under average power
constraints. Owing to the high computational complexity of
the optimal policy, we extended the scope of greedy link
schedulers to handle average power constraints for wireless
networks under a binary interference model. We proposed
a greedy link scheduling and power control scheme, GECS,
and show that the efﬁciency ratio of GECS for any wireless
network is lower bounded by the Local Pooling Factor (LPF)
of the network graph. LPF has been previously used to
characterize the performance of certain greedy schedulers,
separately from the rest of the system. Here, we show that
LPF can be used to characterize the performance of cross-layer
schemes, spanning multiple layers. Some interesting future
directions include analyzing the performance of GECS under
fading channels, and under more general interference models.

In Theorem 3, we show that the efﬁciency ratio of the
GECS policy for a network graph G is lower bounded by
the LPF σ ∗ of G.
Theorem 3. Consider a network graph G with LPF σ ∗ . The
GECS policy stabilizes any λ ∈ σ ∗ ΛPav .
The proof is given in Appendix A. Although GECS is
also in the spirit of the LQF policy, we use a Lyapunov
function V (Q, U ) = maxl∈E Q2 + Ul2 , that is different from
l
the ones used for LQF and GMS in [8], [10]. The performance
guarantees of GECS in terms of LPF is attractive as the LPF
has been extensively studied in context of characterizing the
performance of GMS in wireless networks [10], [11] and
[14]. Indeed, [15],for instance identiﬁes all network graphs
whose LPF is 1 under node-exclusive interference models.
Here we show that the LPF can be used to characterize the
performance of a joint power controller and scheduler, rather
than only the scheduler. This is a step towards a complete
performance characterization of cross-layer schemes with a
single parameter.
V. S IMULATIONS
In this section we simulate the performance of GECS
for the six-cycle graph in Fig. 2. For the same network
graph, we also simulate the performance of another candidate
greedy scheduler, which we call Greedy Max-weight (GMW).
GMW is a greedy approximation of the optimal policy in
(2) that gives priority to the link with the highest weight

A PPENDIX A
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Due to space considerations, we provide a sketch of the
proof here and leave the detailed proof to the technical
report[19] We ﬁrst provide the following Lemma that shows
the existence of a stationary policy that keeps the queues
stable.
Lemma 1. For any arrival rate λ ∈ σ ∗ ΛP av , there is a
stationary policy ΦS such that λl < σ ∗ µl (ΦS ), ∀l ∈ E, and
Plav ≥ Pl (ΦS ), ∀l ∈ E.
We prove Theorem 1 by identifying a Lyapunov function
and showing that its drift is negative for the ﬂuid limit model
of the system. Let Al (t) be the process representing the
cumulative arrivals upto time t, and Sl (t) be the cumulative

4

service process for queue Ql . Similarly let Wl (t) and Y(t)
be the cumulative arrival and service process for the virtual
queue Ul (t). We deﬁne Gli (t) as the number of time slots
upto time t that link l was served with power level Pli . Let
Gl (t) be the number of time slots upto time t that link l was
selected by GECS in step 1 of the description of the GECS
policy given in section III. Consider the sequence of scaled
1
1
1
1
1
processes { n Al (nt), n Sl (nt), n Ql (nt), n Wl (nt), n Y(nt),
1
1
1
Ul (nt), n Gl (nt), n Gli (nt)}. Then, there exists a subsen
quence xn such that x1 Al (xn t) → λl t, x1 Sl (xn t) → sl (t),
n
n
1
1
1
xn Ql (xn t) → ql (t), xn Wl (xn t) → wl (t), xn Yl (xn t) →
1
1
av
Pl t, xn Ul (xn t) → ul (t), xn Gl (xn t) → gl (t), and
1
xn Gli (xn t) → gli (t) w.p. 1. The ﬂuid limits are absolutely
continuous, and satisfy:
d
ql (t) =
dt

[λl − µl (t)]+ , if ql (t) > 0;
0
o.w
[wl (t) − Plav ]+ ,
ˆ
0

The proof of Lemma 4 is given in [19]. Lemma 4 shows
d 2
that there exists a link l ∈ L(t) such that dt ql (t) + u2 (t) <
l
0. Considering the Lyapunov function V (q(t), u(t)), we have
d
1 d
2
2
dt V (q(t), u(t)) ≤ maxl∈L(t) 2 dt (ql (t) + ul (t)) < 0. This
establishes the negative drift of the Lyapunov function and
hence the ﬂuid limit model of the system is stable. Then, the
corresponding qeueuing sytem is also stable as a consequence
of Theorem 4 [18].
R EFERENCES
[1] R. L. Cruz and A. Santhanam, “Optimal Routing, Link Scheduling , and
Power Control in Multi-hop Wireless Networks", IEEE Infocom 2003.
[2] R. Bhatia and M. S. Kodialam, “On Power Efﬁcient Communication
over Multi-hop Wireless Networks: Joint Routing, Scheduling and Power
Control", IEEE Infocom 2004.
[3] M. J. Neely, “Energy optimal control for time-varying wireless networks", IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, July 2006.
[4] A. L. Stolyar. 2005. Maximizing Queueing Network Utility Subject to
Stability: Greedy Primal-Dual Algorithm. Queueing Syst. Theory Appl.
50, 4 (August 2005), 401-457.
[5] C. Li and M. J. Neely. 2010. Energy-Optimal Scheduling with Dynamic
Channel Acquisition in Wireless Downlinks. IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing 9, 4 (April 2010)
[6] J. W. Lee, R. Majumdar, N. B. Shroff, “Downlink power allocation for
multi-class wireless systems", IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 13(4): 854-867
(2005)
[7] L. Lin, X. Lin, and N. B. Shroff, “Low-complexity and distributed
energy minimization in multihop wireless networks," IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw. 18, 2 April 2010,
[8] A. Dimakis and J. Walrand, “Sufﬁcient conditions for stability of
Longest-Queue-First scheduling: Second order properties using ﬂuid
limits," Advances in Applied probability, vol. 38, no. 2, pp.505-521,
2006.
[9] G. Sharma, N. B. Shroff, and R. R. Mazumdar,“On the Complexity of
Scheduling in Wireless Networks,"ACM MobiCom, September 2006.
[10] C. Joo, X. Lin and Ness. B. Shroff,“Understanding the capacity region
of the Greedy maximal scheduling algorithm in multihop wireless
networks", IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 17, August 2009.
[11] C. Joo, X. Lin and Ness. B. Shroff, “Greedy Maximal Matching:
Performance Limits for Arbitrary Network Graphs Under the Nodeexclusive Interference Model” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2734–2744, Dec. 2009.
[12] G. Zussman, A. Brzezinski, and E. Modiano, “Multihop Local Pooling
for Distributed Throughput Maximization in Wireless Networks,” in
IEEE INFOCOM, Apr. 2008.
[13] M. Leconte, J. Ni, and R. Srikant, “Improved bounds on the throughput
efﬁciency of greedy maximal scheduling in wireless networks," ACM
MobiHoc 2009.
[14] Bo Li, Chem Boyaci and Ye Xia, “A Reﬁned Performance Characterization of Longest-Queue-First Policy in Wireless Networks,”, Proceedings
of ACM MobiHoc, 2009.
[15] B. Birand, M. Chudnovsky, B. Ries, P. Seymour, G. Zussman, and Y.
Zwols, “Analyzing the performance of greedy maximal scheduling via
local pooling and graph theory." In Proc. INFOCOM’10.
[16] L.Tassiulas, and A.Ephremides, “Stability properties of constrained
queueing systems and scheduling policies for maximum throughput in
multi-hop radio networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
pages 1936-1948, December 1992.
[17] J. G. Dai, “ On positive Harris Recurrence of Multiclass Queueing
Networks: A Uniﬁed approach via Fluid Limit Models", Annals of
Applied Probability, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 49-77, 1995.
[18] M. Andrews, K. Kumaran, K. Ramanan, A. Stolyar, R. Vijayakumar,
P. Whiting, “ Scheduling in a Queueing System with Asynchronously
Varying Service Rates", Probability in the Engineering and Informational
Sciences, Volume 18, Issue 2, April 2004, pages 191 - 217.
[19] A. Sridharan, C. Joo, and C. E. Koksal, “ Energy Efﬁcient Greedy Link
Scheduling and Power Control in wireless networks", Technical Report,
url=http://www.ece.osu.edu/∼sridhara/greedyschedulingreport.pdf

(3)

d
ul (t) =
dt

following lemma is the ﬁnal step in establishing the negative
drift of the Lyapunov function.
Lemma 4. There exists a link ˜ ∈ L(t) such that q˜(t)µ˜(t) −
l
l
l
S
S
ˆl
u˜(t)w˜(t) ≥ σ ∗ (q˜(t)µ˜ − u˜(t)w˜ ).
ˆl
l
l
l
l

(4)

if ul (t) > 0,
o.w .

Cli [gli (t2 ) − gli (t1 )], if q(t) > 0; (5)

sl (t2 ) − sl (t1 ) =
i
t

Cli gli (t); if q(t) > 0;

(6)

Pli gli (t);

µl (t) =
0

(7)

i
t

wl (t) =
ˆ
0

i

gl (t2 ) − gl (t1 ) =

gli (t2 ) − gli (t1 );

(8)

i

gl (t) =
˙

gli (t);
˙

(9)

i

d
Here, µl (t) = dt sl (t) is the service rate into queue ql , whereas
d
wl (t) = dt wl (t) is the arrival rate into queue ul . Let ML(t)
ˆ
be the set of link activation vectors on the set L(t), as given
in Deﬁnition 2. We deﬁne the projection of a vector a on a
set of edges L, denoted by a|L as Pa, where P is a |L| × |a|1
matrix such that Pij = 1, if i = j and 0 otherwise.
˙
Lemma 2. Consider the vector g(t) = gl (t) , i.e., its lth
˙
˙
element being gl (t). Then, g(t), when projected on the set L(t)
˙
is a convex combination of link activation vectors in ML(t) .

Lemma 3. Under the GECS policy, for each link l, if there
exist power levels i and j such that ql (t)Cli − ul (t)Pli >
ql (t)Clj − ul (t)Plj , then glj (t) = 0.
˙
We now consider the Lyapunov function, V (q(t), u(t)) =
1 2
maxl∈E 2 (ql (t) + u2 (t)). Then, for any l ∈ L(t),
l
d 2
(ql (t) + u2 (t))
(10)
l
dt
= ql (t)(λl − µl (t)) + ul (t)(wl (t) − Plav )
ˆ
(11)
= ql (t)(λl − σ ∗ µS ) − ul (t)(Plav − wl ) + ql (t)σ ∗ µS
ˆS
l
− ul (t)wl − [ql (t)µl (t) − ul (t)wl (t)]
ˆS
ˆ
∗ S

≤ ql (t)(λl − σ µ ) −
∗

ul (t)(Plav

−

wl )
ˆS

+σ

∗

(12)

ql (t)µS
l

ul (t)wl )
ˆS

−σ
− [ql (t)µl (t) − ul (t)wl (t)]
ˆ
(13)
By Lemma 1, we have λl −σ ∗ µS < 0 and Plav − wl ≤ 0. The
ˆS

5

