Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Wed May 16 11:00:48 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:55:04 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      472123 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566015

Min-Cost Multicast Networks in Euclidean Space
Xunrui Yin, Yan Wang, Xin Wang, Xiangyang Xue

Zongpeng Li

School of Computer Science
Fudan University
{09110240030,11110240029,xinw,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Dept. of Computer Science, University of Calgary
and Institute of Network Coding, CUHK
zongpeng@ucalgary.ca

Abstract—Space information ﬂow is a new ﬁeld of research
recently proposed by Li and Wu [1], [2]. It studies the transmission of information in a geometric space, where information ﬂows can be routed along any trajectories, and can be
encoded wherever they meet. The goal is to satisfy given endto-end unicast/multicast throughput demands, while minimizing
a natural bandwidth-distance sum-product (network volume).
Space information ﬂow models the design of a blueprint for a
minimum-cost network. We study the multicast version of the
space information ﬂow problem, in Euclidean spaces. We present
a simple example that demonstrates the design of an information
network is indeed different from that of a transportation network.
We discuss properties of optimal multicast network embedding,
prove that network coding does not make a difference in the
basic case of 1-to-2 multicast, and prove upper-bounds on the
number of relay nodes required in an optimal acyclic multicast
network.

Fig. 1. An example where the optimal multicast network is not a minimum
Steiner tree. Black nodes are terminals: s1 , s2 , and s3 are sources with the
same information, requested by receivers t1 , t2 , and t3 . White nodes are relay
nodes inserted. Each of a, b, and hence a + b, is an information ﬂow of rate
0.5. Thick solid edges have capacity 1, thinner solid edges have capacity 0.5.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The classic Minimum Euclidean Steiner tree problem studies the shortest tree that connects a given set of nodes in an
Euclidean space. It has a broad range of applications in operations research and communication networks. In particular,
it has been believed that the design of a min-cost multicast
network is equivalent to constructing a minimum Steiner tree.
More speciﬁcally, given the positions of n nodes in an
Euclidean space Rd , the minimum Steiner tree problem is
to ﬁnd a min-cost network connecting the n nodes. Relay
nodes can be inserted wherever desired, and a link can be
drawn between any pair of nodes. An optimal solution always
has a tree structure, and the cost of the tree is the total
length of its edges/links. With the conventional store-andforward principle, a minimum multicast network connecting
given terminals is always a minimum Euclidean Steiner tree.
In a Steiner tree, every link has a unit capacity 1. With
network coding, it is natural to weight the cost of a link by
its capacity. The total cost of a multicast network is then its
“volume”: the product of capacity and distance at each link,
summed over all links in the network. Li and Wu [1] show
that given network coding, a min-cost multicast network is no
longer necessarily a Steiner tree. Below we explain this fact
with a new and simpler example.
Fig. 1 shows six terminals lying on an equilateral triangle.
Nodes s1 , s2 , and s3 are sources having the same information,
which is requested by receivers t1 , t2 , and t3 at unit rate 1
bps. A min-cost multicast network without network coding is
shown in (a), which is a geometric embedding of a Steiner
forest, with capacity 1 at each link. Edge length of the

large equilateral triangle is 2. Fig. 1(a) shows the minimum
multicast network based on network coding, with ﬂow rate
0.5 √ each link. The total cost of this multicast network
at
is 3 3/2. Fig. 1(b) shows a minimum network based on a
Steiner tree, for supporting the same multicast rate of 1 to the
three receivers. Each link ﬂow rate here is 1, the three angles at
√
each relay are all 120◦ . The total cost of the Steiner tree is 7.
√
√
.
The ratio of the two costs is 7/(3 3/2) = 1.018. It is worth
pointing out that, although the gap between tree based and
network coding based multicast network costs is small, the gap
reveals a fundamental difference in the underlying structure of
tree based multicast and network coding based multicast in a
geometric space. Consequently, these two problems may have
drastically different computational complexity.
s
s1
t1

s2

t3

t2

s3

Fig. 2. Transform the multiple sources example into a single source example.

While the above example includes multiple sources, it can
be transformed into a single source example. As shown in
Fig. 2, add a new source node s, connect s to each of s1 ,
s2 , and s3 with a curved path where receivers are densely

1

distributed. When these new receivers are close enough to each
other on the three new paths, an optimal multicast network
will connect them along the three curved paths. Consequently,
from the point of view of t1 , t2 and t3 , s1 , s2 , and s3 become
information sources holding common information of interest,
and we are back at the scenario in Fig. 1.
In this work, we concentrate on the new problem of min-cost
multicast network design with network coding, in Euclidean
spaces. As one of the ﬁrst work along this direction, we
study basic problems including (1) what properties must an
optimal multicast network have, (2) when does an optimal
multicast network require and not require network coding, and
(3) the computational complexity of constructing the optimal
multicast network. In particular, we prove that network coding
is not necessary in the basic case of 1-to-2 multicast (three
terminals, including one source and two receivers). We also
prove upper-bounds on the number of relay nodes required in
an optimal acyclic multicast network.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the
formal formulation of the problem and develop an equivalent
discrete model that is helpful in the following analysis. In Sec.
III, we prove that network coding is unnecessary for the case
of three terminals. In Sec. IV, we study the number of relay
nodes required in an optimal acyclic multicast network. We
conclude the paper and discuss open questions in Sec. V.

where

B. Discrete Model
We next transform the optimal multicast network design
problem into its discrete version, which will be utilized in our
later analysis.
In a practical network coding or routing solution, information ﬂow rates are rational numbers. We can deﬁne a unit ﬂow
rate as one symbol (from a ﬁnite ﬁeld F) per unit time. Then
all the information ﬂow rates and link capacities are integral. A
link with capacity larger than 1 can be replaced with parallel
links of unit capacity. Let D(V, A) denote such a directed
network, and λD (s, t) denote the maximum number of linkdisjoint paths from s to t in D. Then with linear network
coding [5], h = mint∈R λD (s, t) symbols can be transmitted
to each receiver per unit time. Therefore, the average cost for a
→
1
→
unit rate multicast session is h uv∈A | uv |, and the problem
to ﬁnd such a min cost discrete network can be formulated as:

A. Problem Formulation
Let T denote the set of n terminals and s ∈ T be the source.
A network is speciﬁed by a ﬁnite directed graph D(V, A),
→
→
T ⊂ V , the capacity c(uv) of each link uv∈ A, and the
position ρ(v) of each relay node v ∈ V . A network is called a
feasible multicast network if it can support a unit rate multicast
session from s to each receiver t ∈ R = T \{s}.
→
The cost of link uv is given by the product of its capacity
→
→
c(uv) and its length | uv |, i.e., the Euclidean distance between
u and v. The cost of introducing a relay node is ignored. Hence
the cost of a network is the summation of its link costs.
The multicast version of the space information ﬂow problem, or the design of a min-cost multicast network in a
geometric space, is to construct a feasible multicast network of
minimum cost. With network coding, feasibility is checked by
verifying whether the network can support a multicast ﬂow of
unit rate. A celebrated result on network coding states that,
for multicast in a directed network, a given multicast rate
is feasible if it is feasible as a unicast rate to each receiver
→
separately [3]. Let f t (uv) be the s-t ﬂow from u to v. The
problem can be formulated as follows:
→

uv∈A

∀t ∈ R, ∀u ∈ V
∀t ∈ R, ∀u, v ∈ V

min

h∈N+

v∈V

(2)
∀t ∈ R

C. Optimal embedding of a multicast network
By deﬁnition, a solution to a space information ﬂow problem has two components: a multicast network D(V, A) and an
embedding (location assignment of each relay node). In this
subsection, we discuss properties that an optimal embedding
of a multicast network must possess. Some of these properties
are utilized in our proofs in the next section.
In the literature of the Euclidean Steiner Tree problem [6],
Gilbert and Pollak study the properties of relatively minimal

t

f (uv) − f (vu) = δ (u)
→

| uv |

Note that the Euclidean Steiner tree problem can be viewed
as a special case with h = 1.
To show that the two formulations (1) and (2) are equivalent,
we only need to verify that the optimal solution of (1), if
existent, can always be achieved by rational link capacities.
This is true because all the coefﬁcients and constants of
the linear constraints in (1) are rational. So we can scale
each link’s capacity with the least common multiple of their
denominators to make each link’s capacity integral to obtain
an optimal solution of (2).

→

t →

→

→

uv∈A

λD (s, t) ≥ h,

(1)
t →

1
h

subject to :

c(uv)| uv |

subject to :

if u = s
if u = t
otherwise

Remarks. Note that in the geometric version of the multicast
problem, the number and locations of relay nodes are not
speciﬁed in the input, and the mathematical program above
can not be solved using regular optimization techniques.
Which terminal assumes the role of the multicast source is
actually not important for constructing an optimal multicast
network. If the role between a receiver and the source is
switched, we only need to reverse some links (or reverse parts
of the link’s capacity) of the original optimal multicast network
to support the new multicast session [4].

II. P ROBLEM M ODEL AND P RELIMINARIES

minimize


 1
−1
δ t (u) =

0

→

0 ≤ f t (uv) ≤ c(uv)

2

III. T HE E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN S TEINER T REES AND
M IN -C OST M ULTICAST N ETWORKS FOR T HREE
T ERMINALS
Space information ﬂow is a new ﬁeld of research, and basic
problems remain open on the design of a min-cost multicast
network in a geometric space. Three important ones are listed
below.
Achievability. Given a ﬁnite set of terminals, is the minimum
cost achievable with a ﬁnite network, i.e., a multicast network
with a ﬁnite number of relay nodes? In the problem formulation, no bound is enforced on the size of a solution D(V, A).
There is a possibility that no ﬁnite network is optimal, in that
for any ﬁnite multicast network, there exists another network
that achieves a less cost by including more relay nodes.
Beneﬁts of network coding. How much is the difference
between the cost of a minimum Steiner tree and a minimum
network coding based solution? In Li and Wu’s work [1] that
proposes the space information ﬂow problem, such a gap is
studied, with upper-bound on the gap proven for special cases.
Complexity. Is there an efﬁcient (polynomial-time) algorithm
that computes the optimal solution? While Euclidean Steiner
Tree is a well known NP-hard problem, it is unclear whether
the new problem of min-cost multicast network design in (1)
is NP-hard or not. The example in Fig. 1 reveals that these
two problems have different underlying structures, and may
have different computational complexity.
These questions are indeed co-related. In this work, we
present two results toward these directions. In the rest of
this section, we prove that in the most basic scenario, when
the input size is small (three terminals), network coding does
not make a difference. This leads to an interesting contrast
to the network information ﬂow case (optimal multicast in
a ﬁxed, existing network), where in the well-known threeterminal butterﬂy network [3], network coding outperforms
routing. In the next section, we prove that ﬁnitely many relays
always sufﬁce, and present closed-form upper-bounds on the
number of relays required for achieving minimum cost in
acyclic networks.
As a basic scenario, the three terminals case is well-studied
in the Euclidean Steiner tree literature. The minimum Steiner
tree for 3 terminals contains at most 1 relay node of degree 3.
From the Stable at Relay property, the three links must meet
at the relay with three 120◦ angles. Such a location is called
the Fermat Point. Let’s deﬁne the cost advantage as the ratio
of the minimum network cost without coding over that with
network coding. By showing that the cost advantage is 1 for
three terminals, we can see that network coding is unnecessary
for this case, and the min-cost multicast network is a minimum
Steiner tree.

Fig. 3. Wedge property. If W contains no terminal nodes and each relay
node has three non-zero length links, W contains no relay nodes.

Steiner trees. Some of such properties can be extended to
the scenario of space information ﬂow. Besides the goal of
minimizing total network cost, we have no constraints on the
embedding, e.g., the embedding does not have to be planar
even if the space is 2-D, and links may intersect.
We say an embedding is relatively minimal with respect to
network D(V, A), if we can not reduce the overall network
cost by perturbing a relay node, i.e., by changing the position
of some relay node slightly. When the position of a relay node
→
→
v is changed by dx, the length of link uv is changed by uv ·
→
→

|uv|

dx. If | uv | = 0, the length is increased by |dx|. Therefore,
we have the following properties:
Stable at Relay. Imagine each link of non-zero length as an
elastic band with the unusual property of having unit tension
regardless of how much it is stretched. For links of zero
length, imagine them as glue binding the two nodes, which can
provide a unit passive force at most. Suppose there is some
external force at each terminal to hold its position. Then in
any relatively minimal embedding, the position of each relay
node is stable. In fact, the combined external force at any set
of relay nodes is zero.
Convex Hull. In any relatively minimal embedding, all relay
nodes lie in the convex hull of T .
Convexity. Let ρ1 and ρ2 be two embeddings of the same
network, with cost C1 and C2 , respectively. For any p, q ≥
0, p+q = 1, the embedding ρ = pρ1 +qρ2 has cost C ≤ pC1 +
qC2 . Therefore, any relatively minimal embedding achieves
the minimum cost of the given multicast network.
Unlike in the minimum Steiner tree problem, a relay node
may have more than three adjacent links in the optimal
multicast network enabled by network coding. Thus some
properties of the relatively minimal Steiner tree [6] do not hold
for the relatively minimal embedding, because these properties
depend on the assumption that a Steiner (relay) node has three
non-zero length links. We translate one of these properties
into a conditioned form for the optimal embedding in a plane,
which is useful in our proof to the three terminals case:
Wedge Property. Let W ⊂ R2 be any open wedge-shaped
region with an angle of at least 120◦ (Fig. 3). In any relatively
minimal embedding on a plane where each relay node has
three non-zero length links, if W does not contain any terminal
node, W contains no relay node [6].

Theorem 1. If |T | = 3, the cost advantage is always 1. In
other words, the minimum Steiner tree achieves the minimum
cost, which cannot be improved by network coding.
Proof: We prove the theorem by way of contradiction.
Suppose there is a conﬁguration T = {s, t1 , t2 } with cost

3

multicast in a network (instead of in a space), network coding
starts to make a difference for three terminals already — in
the butterﬂy network, there are one source and two terminals.
IV. U PPER - BOUNDS ON T HE N UMBER OF R ELAY N ODES

Fig. 4.

In the literature of network coding, the case of two integral
ﬂows has attracted considerable research interests [7][8]. It
represents the most basic scenario where network coding can
make a difference from routing. For the case h = 1, we are
back to multicast trees.
In this section, we analyze the maximum number of relay
nodes that can be required in an optimal solution to the
multicast problem in space. We focus on the two ﬂow case
ﬁrst, and then extend our discussions to more general cases
of h > 2. Once the number of relay nodes is upper bounded,
the problem in (1) becomes an optimization problem of ﬁnite
variables, simplifying its solution algorithm design.
For the case h = 1, studies on the Euclidean Steiner tree
problem have shown that the minimum cost can be achieved
by adding n − 2 relay nodes at most. Our result essentially
generalizes the study to the case h = 2.
Before stating the theorem, we ﬁrst introduce the concepts
of a h-minimal network and a subtree decomposition.
While searching for the optimal solution, it is reasonable to
consider only the h-minimal networks [9], where deleting any
link will cause λD (s, t) < h for some receiver t. According
to Li, et al. [5], for any h-minimal network, there is a linear
network code where each link is assigned a global coding
vector from the h dimension linear space Fh . Therefore in a
h-minimal network, each node has in-degree at most h, since
the coding vector on an extra link would be linearly dependent
with the other h coding vectors and thus redundant.
For further analyzing the structure of a h-minimal network,
Fragouli and Soljanin introduce the feasible subtree decomposition [7], which divides all the links into subtrees such
that there exists a feasible coding solution with links from the
same subtree allocated the same coding vector. These subtrees
are classiﬁed into source subtrees, rooted at the source, and
coding subtrees, rooted at non-source nodes.

Splitting a relay node.

advantage strictly larger than 1. Then there must be a network
with total cost strictly less than the cost of a minimum Steiner
tree. Let D(V, A) be such a minimal network which has the
minimum number of links. We will show that we can construct
a network D with the same number of links and cost no
more than the cost of D, while its optimal embedding has
no zero length links and each relay has 3 links at most.
Therefore, applying the Wedge Property concludes that all the
relay nodes locate on the edge of the minimal Steiner tree,
which contradicts the assumption.
We construct the desired topology D from D by splitting a
relay node of degree larger than 3 repeatedly, while preserving
the max ﬂow to each receiver. As illustrated in Fig. 4, splitting
a relay node corresponds to replacing the relay node with two
nodes, and dividing the adjacent links into two none empty
parts connected to the two nodes respectively. Note that if such
splitting exists, the total cost does not increase and there is no
zero length links in the optimal embedding of D . Otherwise,
we can merge the two ends of a zero length link to obtain
a new topology with the same cost but less links, which
conﬂicts with the fact that D has the minimum number of
links. Therefore, we can obtain the desired network satisfying
the condition of Wedge Property.
Let (f1 , f2 ) be a max ﬂow solution for receiver t1 and t2 . As
we are considering the discrete model, all links can be divided
into three classes: (A) with ﬂow (f1 (e), f2 (e)) = (0, 1); (B)
with ﬂow (1, 0); (C) with ﬂow (1, 1). For a relay node of
degree larger than 3, if there exist an incoming link and
an outgoing link belonging to the same class, we complete
the splitting by connecting these two links to a new node.
Otherwise, all incoming links and outgoing links belong to
different classes. According to the ﬂow conversation law, it
can be veriﬁed that classes A and B always belong to the
same side, i.e., either incoming links belong to class A and B,
and outgoing links belong to class C, or the other way around.
In any case, we ﬁnd a class A link, a class B link and a class
C link to complete the splitting operation.

Theorem 2. When h = 2, there exists an optimal multicast
network that has (2n − 3)(2n − 2) + n − 1 relay nodes at most.
Proof: Consider an optimal solution with h = 2 that
has the minimum number of links. If there exists a splittable
relay node, we apply the splitting operation to it. During the
splitting, the cost of the network and the number of links
in the network both remain unchanged, and the number of
nodes increases by 1. Since the total number of nodes is
upper-bounded by twice the number of links, which is not
changing, sooner or later we have no more relay nodes to
split. Let D(V, A) be the optimal network after such splitting.
In network D, a relay node with in-degree larger than 1 must
be an encoding node, since otherwise it can be splitted.
As an optimal solution, D must be 2-minimal. Hence each
node has in-degree no more than 2. The relay nodes can be
categorized into two sets: 1) inner Steiner nodes with in-degree

Discussion. As n grows larger, eventually there will be conﬁgurations with cost advantage strictly larger than 1. Recall that
in the example illustrated in Fig. 1, six terminals are used to
construct a multiple source example where cost advantage is
strictly larger than 1. It is unknown whether the cost advantage
can be larger than 1 for the cases n = 4 and n = 5. For

4

1, which appear exactly once in a minimum Steiner subtree;
2) coding nodes with in-degree 2. We prove an upper-bound
on the size of each set separately.
For the minimal subtree decomposition, we have the following lemma:

Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University
under Grant NCET-11-0113. Xin Wang is the corresponding
author.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Li and C. Wu, “Space information ﬂow,” Tech. Rep. [Online].
Available: http://pages.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/ zongpeng/publications/sif.pdf
[2] ——, “Space Information Flow: Multiple Unicast,” in IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory, ISIT’12, Jul. 2012.
[3] R. Ahlswede, N. Cai, S.-Y. Li, and R. Yeung, “Network information ﬂow,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1204–1216,
Jul. 2000.
[4] Z. Li, B. Li, and L. C. Lau, “A constant bound on throughput improvement
of multicast network coding in undirected networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1016–1026, Mar. 2009.
[5] S.-Y. Li, R. Yeung, and N. Cai, “Linear network coding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 371–381, Feb. 2003.
[6] E. Gilbert and H. Pollak, “Steiner minimal trees,” Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–29, Jan. 1968.
[7] C. Fragouli and E. Soljanin, “Information ﬂow decomposition for network
coding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp.
829 –848, Mar. 2006.
[8] S. el Rouayheb, C. Georghiades, and A. Sprintson, “Network coding in
minimal multicast networks,” in Information Theory Workshop, 2006. ITW
’06 Punta del Este. IEEE, Mar. 2006, pp. 307 –311.
[9] M. Langberg, A. Sprintson, and J. Bruck, “The encoding complexity
of network coding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52,
no. 6, pp. 2386 – 2397, Jun. 2006.

Lemma. (C. Fragouli and E. Soljanin [7]) For minimal subtree
decomposition of a 2-minimal network, each coding subtree
contains at least two receivers and each source subtree contains at least one receiver.
As each receiver appears in exactly two different subtrees,
the number of coding subtrees is no more than n − 1. Since
a coding node is the root of at least one coding subtree, the
number of coding nodes is also no more than n − 1.
On the other hand, each subtree is a minimum Euclidean
Steiner tree connecting a subset of the n terminals and no
more than n−1 coding nodes. Therefore, each subtree contains
2n − 3 inner Steiner nodes at most. According to the previous
analysis, there are no more than 2(n − 1) subtrees, since each
subtree contains at least one receiver node. To conclude, the
number of inner Steiner nodes is upper-bounded by (2n −
3)(2n − 2).
Acyclic networks with arbitrary h. According to the result
that the number of coding nodes is upper bounded by h3 (n −
1)2 in an acyclic multicast network [9], we can show that the
number of relay nodes is upper bounded in such networks
in a similar way: in an h-minimal network, any relay node
with in-degree larger than 1 must be a coding node and thus
the total number of relays is bounded by h3 (n − 1)2 ; for the
relay nodes with in-degree 1, they appear exactly once in each
coding subtree. The number of coding forests, each of which
is composed of coding subtrees of the same coding vector, is
no more than nh , since a ﬁnite ﬁeld of size n is sufﬁcient and
the number of different coding vectors is no more than nh .
As each coding forest has n + h3 (n − 1)2 − 2 inner Steiner
nodes (relay node with in-degree 1) at most, we can see that
the number of relay nodes with in-degree 1 is no more than
nh (n + h3 (n − 1)2 − 2).
V. C ONCLUSION
We studied the multicast version of the space information
ﬂow problem in this work, which models the design of the
blueprint of a min-cost multicast network. We showed through
a simple example that the design of an information network is
different from that of a transportation network. We discussed
a number of properties that an optimal multicast network
embedding must possess. For the basic case of three multicast
terminals, we prove that network coding does not make a
difference, contrasting the problem of multicast in networks.
We ﬁnally prove upper-bounds on the number of relay nodes
required in min-cost multicast networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61171074, the National S&T
Major Project of China under Grant 2010ZX03003-003-03,

5

