Like most all modern-day rechargeable batteries, battery overall life is extended, and a deeper Apple Battery Charger Led attained, when a battery is NOT 100% charged all the time. A small bit LESS THAN 100% charge, and a small charge/discharge cycle - nothing major - is not only desirable, it's a good idea. And The Apple Battery Charger Led sets a new industry standard, with this standard most of people like it and choose this cool and useful charger to get more energy when they use the iPhone or the energy already run out.


 
When your iPhone says that it's powered up to 100%, the device indeed may still be charging. That's because of how the batteries in iPhone and other Apple Battery Charger Led devices work — once they reach a full charge, they discharge a bit. The battery then begins a cycle of charging and discharging at near-full power until it’s unplugged. Lots of Apple Battery Charger Led does that. As Novus said, lithium batteries discharge slightly because people leave them plugged in too long. It’s just a safety measure, has been for a long time, nothing new Halloween iPhone Cases or exciting for apple and just a run of the mill battery.

The Apple Battery Charger Led sets a new industry standard: It has the lowest standby power usage value — or "vampire draw" — of any similar charger on the market.1 That’s the energy most chargers continue to draw after their batteries are fully charged. But the Apple Battery Charger Led senses when its batteries have finished charging and automatically reduces the amount of power it needs. In addition, the reusable batteries that come with each Apple Battery Charger Led are designed to maintain a high charge capacity for hundreds of charges, so you no longer have to buy new batteries or throw them away every few months. By the way I want to tell you the Led Case iPhone 4 is a good choice for your iPhone and you can consider it.

When the Apple Battery Charger Led recharges your batteries, it not only maximizes battery performance and lifespan, it also conserves energy. Thanks to an intelligent power management system, the Apple Battery Charger uses less power once your batteries are fully charged, making it one of the most energy-efficient rechargeable battery solutions ever. The Apple Battery Charger Led can recharge one or two batteries at a time.