
Football is a game where the guys would do anything to win the game. It involves the use of pads , spikes , helmet , buckles and so many other instruments, which have been developed recently to ensure safety of the players but we still love the original form of the game as it makes you forget everything else in life. Here there are many other things to worry about - the amazing catches , dropped passes , extra points , field goals and the monster hits. Monster hits are favourites of many, which can completely change the future of a game. Lots of discipline and hard work are required to be a player. The game is full of miracles and you should even be ready for unbelievable let downs.


 
Various experimentations on the shape and structure of ball have been made. Earlier the ball was made up of pig’s bladder which was inflated. Later the ball was covered with a leather sheet, which allowed the ball to hold the shape. Now the patented vulcanised rubber balls have been introduced, which are spherical and these are most popular football balls.

“Soccer” is the term used by football clubs and there are various forms of footballs known in the history. Some forms are association football, which is also called the soccer, footy, footie or football. The five-a-side football is the form where a different set of rules is followed. The indoor form of football is called the “indoor soccer” which is common in Latin America. This form of football has played in open air venues. Mature football is the game which is played commonly for mature players above the age of 35 years. In Paralympics games different forms of football are played. Beach soccer, street football, crab football and various other types of soccer are also known locally.

Rugby league is the form of football which is also called” league “and mini football is a variety which is designed for children. Best is the street football which is played in every backyard in America without the backup of the devices and safety equipment, and it is based on simplified rules for common street players. Many other forms of hybrid games have been developed which involves the style of football but the rules are different. Women's football is also common in many countries and various other forms of recreation are part of its Tabletop setup that has been adopted by people in different parts of the world.