Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Fri May 18 21:52:00 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:42 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      388395 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566713
1

The generalized multiplexing gain region of the
slow fading MIMO interference channel and its
achievability with limited feedback
Sanjay Karmakar

Mahesh K. Varanasi

perfect CSIT assumption and answer the above question with a
sufﬁcient condition on the number of feedback bits per channel
realization needed to achieve the perfect CSIT GMGR. The
GMGR of the network is the set of simultaneously achievable
multiplexing gains achievable by the transmit/receive pairs so
that the corresponding diversity order of the overall outage
probability is strictly greater than zero, with the direct link
signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) and the cross-link interferenceto-noise ratios (INRs) allowed to vary while maintaining
arbitrary but ﬁxed ratios with respect to a nominal SNR on the
dB scale. In general, the GMGR on an interference network
plays the role of multiplexing gain on a point-to-point channel
except for the fact that SNRs and INRs of the different links
now can have different SNR exponents as just described.
First, the GMGR of the MIMO IC if characterized under
the perfect CSIT assumption. A simple HK coding scheme
with two-level linear Gaussian superposition coding, no time
sharing and channel dependent covariance matrices for each
users messages is shown to be GMGR optimal. It is shown
that at each transmitter the covariance matrices of the private
and the public sub-message codewords are functions of the
null space of the corresponding cross-link channel matrix.
Subsequently, we propose a partial CSIT scheme and show that
it is sufﬁcient to feedback this null space information to T xi
using only Nj (Nj − Mi )+ log(ρij ) number of bits1 from Rxj
to achieve the FCSIT GMGR (e.g., see Theorem 2). Moreover,
we also derive the GMGR under the no CSIT assumption for
MIMO ICs for which (a) Mi ≤ Nj for i = j ∈ {1, 2} and
(b) M1 ≤ N2 ≤ N1 (or M2 ≤ N1 ≤ N2 ) under the strong
interference regime where the INR is larger than the SNR at
each of the receivers.

Abstract—The generalized multiplexing gain region (GMGR)
of the slow-fading MIMO interference channel is obtained under
the assumption of perfect channel state information at the
transmitters (CSIT) in the general case where there are an
arbitrary number of antennas at each of the four nodes. It
is shown that a simple Han-Kobayashi (HK) linear Gaussian
superposition coding scheme with a public/private message split
at each transmitter can achieve the GMGR of the channel if
the covariance matrices associated with the private and public
sub-message codewords at each transmitter are certain functions
of the null-space of the respective cross-link channel matrix.
Moreover, in such a coding scheme, the multiplexing gains of
the sub-messages can be chosen without any CSIT. Building
on this result, and with Mi and Ni denoting the numbers
of transmit and receive antennas at the ith transmitter and
receiver, respectively, it is shown that at transmitter i an approximate version of the associated null-space expressed in terms of
Nj (Mi −Nj )+ log(INRij ) bits per channel realization is sufﬁcient
to achieve the perfect CSIT GMGR of the channel, where INRij is
the interference-to-noise ratio at receiver j. Furthermore, under
the assumption of no CSIT, the GMGR is characterized for two
sub-classes of MIMO ICs.
Index Terms—Channel state information, Fading channel,
Interference channel, Multiplexing gain, Quantized feedback.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The understanding of the single and multi-antenna (MIMO)
interference channel (IC) has been signiﬁcantly enriched in
recent years through approximated capacity characterizations
including capacity within bounded gap [1], [2], [3] and the
generalized degrees of freedom [1], [4]. These results are
derived for ﬁxed or time-invariant channel matrices which
are hence assumed to be known at all the nodes. However,
in wireless fading channels, the knowledge of the channel
matrices must be provided to the transmitters by the receivers
via a feedback channel which may potentially require a large
system bandwidth. On the other hand, with no CSIT whatsoever, the achievable throughput of a network can degrade to an
extent that even the degrees of freedom or multiplexing gain
are reduced (cf. [5]). This leads to the natural question as to
what and how much partial CSIT must be fed back from the
receivers to the transmitters per channel realization so as to
attain the perfect CSIT performance.
In this paper, we characterize the generalized multiplexing
gain region (GMGR) of the slow-fading MIMO IC under the

II. C HANNEL M ODEL AND M ATHEMATICAL
PRELIMINARIES

The general two-user MIMO IC is considered in which
transmitter i (T xi ) has Mi antennas and receiver i (Rxi )
has Ni antennas, respectively for i = 1, 2, and is referred
to henceforth as the (M1 , N1 , M2 , N2 ) MIMO IC. Let Hij ∈
CNj ×Mi model the channel matrix between T xi and Rxj ,
for i, j = 1, 2. We consider quasi-static fading so that while
these matrices are constant for the duration of a codeword,
they change independently across codewords with an identical
distribution. For economy of notation, these matrices will
henceforth together be denoted as H.

This work was supported in part by NSF Grants CCF-0728955 and CCF1144026. The authors are with the Department of Electrical, Computer and
Energy Engineering at the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 30809 USA
e-mail: (sanjay.karmakar@colorado.edu, varanasi@colorado.edu).

1ρ

1

ij

represents the INR at receiver j ∈ {1, 2}.

2

The channel matrices in H are assumed to be mutually
independent and are drawn from a unitarily invariant distribution [6], i.e., if U ∈ UNj ×Nj and V ∈ UMi ×Mi then, U Hij V
and Hij are identically distributed. In addition, the matrices
are assumed to be full rank with probability 1 (w.p.1) and
the probability density functions (pdfs) of the eigenvalues are
assumed to have a polynomial behavior near zero (i.e., when
λ ≈ ρ−δ , for some δ > 0). This is a broad class of channel
statistics2 , including the well known Rayleigh distribution.
Denoting the transmitted signal from T xi , at time t as Xit ∈
CMi ×1 , the received signals at the two receivers can be written
as
Y1t =

SNR11 H11 X1t +

INR21 H21 X2t + Z1t ;

(1)

Y2t =

SNR22 H22 X2t +

INR12 H12 X1t + Z2t ,

number of antennas at the four nodes and with αii = 1 and
αij = α). See also [9]. In this work, we consider the more
general class of fading distributions as described earlier in
this section as well as general numbers of antennas at the four
terminals and general SNR exponents α but specialize our
¯
attention to the GMGR, which is simply the set of multiplexing
gains over which the diversity order of the overall outage
probability is positive, rather than characterize the precise
diversity gain over this GMGR. The GMGR is formally
deﬁned next.
Consider two codebook at the two transmitters with codebook of T xi having rate Ri and with codewords satisfying the
average power constraint. A family of such permissible codes,
one for each nominal SNR ρ, is a permissible coding scheme.
The multiplexing gain pair of this coding scheme is denoted
as (r1 , r2 ) where

(2)

where Zit ∈ CNi ×1 are i.i.d as CN (0, INi ) across i and t,
SNRii and INRij represent the average SNR at receiver i and
INR at receiver j for i = j ∈ {1, 2}, respectively. The input
signals satisfy the following power constraint:
1
n

ri = lim

ρ→∞

≤ 1, ∀ i = 1, 2,

(3)

t=1

where n represents the channel coherence period length, i.e.,
the number of channel uses for which the channel remains
constant. In what follows, we shall denote the SNR and INR
at receiver i by ρii and ρji , respectively, for i = j ∈ {1, 2}.
Finally, to capture the effects of different relative strengths
of the various links we let the SNRs and INRs to vary
exponentially with respect to a nominal SNR, ρ, with different
exponents as follows:
lim
log(ρ)→∞

log(ρij )
= αij , where αij ∈ R+ ,
log(ρ)

(5)

On the other hand, if Pe (¯, r1 , r2 ) represents the maximum
ρ
of the average probability of error at the receivers at a
multiplexing gain pair (r1 , r2 ) and nominal SNR of ρ, then
the corresponding diversity order is deﬁned as

n
†
Tr E Xit Xit

Ri
, for i = 1, 2.
log(ρ)

dIC (r1 , r2 ) = lim

ρ→∞

− log (Pe (¯, r1 , r2 ))
ρ
.
log(ρ)

(6)

A multiplexing gain pair, (r1 , r2 ), is said to be achievable if there exists a permissible coding scheme for which
dIC (r1 , r2 ) > 0.
Deﬁnition 1: The generalized multiplexing gain region is
the closure of the set of all achievable multiplexing gain pairs
of the channel, and is denoted as Mo (¯ ), so that
α

(4)

¯ α
Mo (¯ ) = M(¯ ),
α

(7)

¯
where A represents the closure of a set A and

and i, j ∈ {1, 2}. In what follows, ρ
¯
[ρ11 , ρ12 , ρ21 , ρ22 ]
and α [α11 , α12 , α21 , α22 ] shall be used to describe the
¯
SNRs and INRs of the channel, whichever is more appropriate.
Without loss of generality, we let the direct link SNR of
transmitter/receiver pair 1 to be the nominal SNR, so that
α11 = 1.

M(¯ ) = (r1 , r2 ) ∈ R+2 : dIC (r1 , r2 ) > 0 .
α

(8)

III. T HE GMGR WITH CSIT
In this section, we derive the GMGR Mo (¯) of the
ρ
(M1 , N1 , M2 , N2 ) MIMO IC under the CSIT assumption. We
also analyze the form in which the CSIT is used by a GMGR
optimal coding scheme. For brevity, we refer to the perfect
CSIT GMGR of the MIMO IC simply as its GMGR.
Let us denote by HK (K1u , K1w , K2u , K2w ) = HK∗ a
simple Han-Kobayashi (HK) linear Gaussian superposition
coding scheme where the ith user’s message is divided into
two sub-messages, namely the private message and the public
message, and where these sub-messages are encoded using
mutually independent Gaussian codewords having mean zero
and covariance matrix Kiu and Kiw , respectively for i = 1, 2.
Hence, the codeword transmitted by user i can be written as

A. The generalized multiplexing gain region
The notion of generalized degrees of freedom (GDoF)
region as described in [1], [4] for the ﬁxed interference channel
is of course not valid when there is fading. However, for a
given channel realization H, upper and lower bounds to the
instantaneous mutual information region of the channel can be
found as in Lemma 1 and 4 of [2]. These bounds can be used
to form lower and upper bounds respectively to the outage
probability of the channel. In fact, a high SNR analysis of
these bounds was undertaken in [8] for i.i.d. Rayleigh fading to
obtain the well-known diversity-multiplexing tradeoff (DMT)
of the MIMO IC for the symmetric case (i.e., with an equal

Xit = Uit + Wit , i = 1, 2 and t = 1, 2 · · · ,
where Uit ∼ CN (0, Kiu ) and Wit ∼ CN (0, Kiw ) are
independent, identically distributed (iid) across time.
Theorem 1: a. The
GMGR,
Mo (¯ ),
α
of
the
(M1 , N1 , M2 , N2 ) MIMO IC under the perfect CSIT

2 In [7] the DMT of the point-to-point MIMO channel was computed for a
similar class of channel statistics called the “regular” channel, where channel
coefﬁcients are i.i.d. and in addition to the polynomial behavior near zero their
pdfs have exponential decay tail and upper bounded by constants independent
of ρ.

2

3

assumption and under the fading distribution assumption
of Section II is the set of multiplexing gain pairs (r1 , r2 )
satisfying the constraints

Outline of the Proof of Theorem 1: First we derive a set
of upper bounds (representing a set of rate tuples Ru (H, ρ))
¯
to the instantaneous capacity or mutual information region,
C(H, ρ), of the channel and a set of achievable rate tuples
¯
Ra (H, ρ), achievable by the HK∗ scheme. Both Ru (H, ρ)
¯
¯
and Ra (H, ρ) are dependent on the instantaneous channel
¯
realization and hence are random but satisfy the following set
inequality

r1 ≤ m11 ;
r2 ≤ α22 m22 ;
r3 ≤ f (N2 , (α12 , M1 ), (α22 , M2 )) +
f N1 , (β12 , m12 ), (α11 , (M1 − N2 )+ )
D3
r3 ≤ f (N1 , (α21 , M2 ), (1, M1 )) +
f N2 , (β21 , m21 ), (α22 , (M2 − N1 )+ )
D4
r3 ≤ g N1 , (α21 , M2 ), (β12 , m12 ), (1, (M1 − N2 )+ ) +
g N2 , (α12 , M1 ), (β21 , m21 ), (α22 , (M2 − N1 )+ )
r4 ≤ f (N1 , (α21 , M2 ), (1, M1 )) +
f N1 , (β12 , m12 ), (1, (M1 − N2 )+ ) +
g N2 , (α12 , M1 ), (β21 , m21 ), (α22 , (M2 − N1 )+ )
r5 ≤ f (M2 , (α21 , N1 ), (α22 , N2 )) +
f N2 , (β21 , m21 ), (α22 , (M2 − N1 )+ ) +
g N1 , (α21 , M2 ), (β12 , m12 ), (1, (M1 − N2 )+ )

Ra (H, ρ) ⊆ C(H, ρ) ⊆ Ru (H, ρ).
¯
¯
¯

(12)

Using this set upper and lower bounds to the instantaneous
mutual information region of the channel we next derive
an upper and a lower bound to the DMT of the channel
following similar method as in [10], which in turn gives us a
corresponding set of upper and lower bounds to the GMGR
of the channel. It can be further proved that, these two bounds
coincide, yielding the fundamental GMGR of the channel if
Kiu of HK∗ satisfy equation (11), which proves the second
part of the Theorem. The detailed proof can be found in [11].

The achievable scheme HK∗ is different from that used in
[2] in the choice of the covariance matrices Kiu for the private
sub-message at transmitter i. On the one hand, even though
it is not clear how close the instantaneous mutual information
regions Ra (H, ρ) and Ru (H, ρ) are from each other (whereas
¯
¯
f (u, (a1 , u1 ), (a2 , u2 )) =
these are within a bounded gap of each other for the achievable
+
+
+
min{u, u1 }a1 + min{(u − u1 ) , u2 }a2 , if a1 ≥ a2 ,
scheme in [2]), HK∗ is nevertheless GMGR region optimal if
min{u, u2 }a+ + min{(u − u2 )+ , u1 }a+ , if a1 < a2 ,
2
1
the condition (11) is satisﬁed. On the other hand, as be show
and for i1 , i2 , i3 ∈ {1, 2, 3} such that ai1 ≥ ai2 ≥ ai3 ,
in the next section, the choice of the covariance matrices Kiu
herein facilitates the formulation of the ﬁnite rate feedback
+
g (u, (a1 , u1 ), (a2 , u2 ), (a3 , u3 )) = min{u, ui1 }ai1 +
problem and its solution.
min{(u − ui1 )+ , ui2 }a+ + min{(u − ui1 − ui2 )+ , ui3 }a+ . Let us now consider how much CSIT is required to implei2
i3
∗
b. The
simple
HK
coding
scheme ment the coding scheme HK . It is clear from Theorem 1 that,
HK (K1u , K1w , K2u , K2w ),
where
for
some to achieve the GMGR of the channel the Vi ’s should be chosen
Mi ×Mi
such that (11) is satisﬁed. Such a choice of Vi cannot in general
Vi ∈ U
be independent of the channel state information. Moreover,
1
Im
0
1
Kiu =
Vi (1+ρij ) ij
Vi† , (9) this is not the only step that requires CSIT. For every choice
0
I(Mi −Nj )+
Mi
of multiplexing gain tuple (r1 , r2 ) ∈ Mo (¯) each transmitter
ρ
1
must chose the corresponding information rates for its private
Kiw =
IM − Kiu ,
(10)
Mi i
and public messages, respectively. It is a well-known fact that
such rate split depends on the instantaneous channel matrices
can achieve the GMGR region of the channel if
if the transmitters want to achieve each rate tuple in Ra (H, ρ).
¯
†
log det INi + ρij Hij Kiu Hij ≤ci (H),
(11) Interestingly, in [11] a multiplexing-gain splitting strategy is
suggested which is independent of any CSIT. In other words,
where ci (H) is a constant independent of ρij for all i =
to achieve the GMGR region of the channel CSIT is required
j ∈ {1, 2}, but can depend on the channel realizations.
only to construct Vi ’s which satisfy equation (11).
Remark 1: It is clear from equation (9) that, when Mi ≤
It is proved in [11] that to construct such a Vi at transmitter
Nj=i , Kiu becomes a scaled identity. Putting this into the left
i, it is sufﬁcient to know the null space of the cross link
hand side of equation (11) we have
channel matrix Hij . That is if
IMi
†
H
log det INi + ρij Hij
Σ+
0mij ×(Mi −mij )+
†
Mi (1 + ρij ) ij
ij
Hij = Uij
Vij ,
0(Nj −mij )+ ×mij 0(Nj −mij )+ ×(Mi −mij )+
1
†
≤ log det INi +
Hij Hij = ci (H).
Mi
where U ∈ UNj ×Nj and V ∈ UMi ×Mi are unitary matrices,
where r3 = r1 + α22 r2 , r4 = 2r1 + α22 r2 , r5 = r1 +
2α22 r2 , βij = (αii − αij ), nij = (Mi − Nj )+ and mij =
min{Mi , Nj } for i, j ∈ {1, 2} as deﬁned earlier,

ij

ij

mij = min{Mi , Nj } and Σ+ is a diagonal matrix containing
ij
the non-zero singular values of the matrix, then the knowledge
of the subspace spanned by the last (Mi − Nj )+ columns of
the matrix Vij , denoted by Si is sufﬁcient.

A consequence of this fact is that, to achieve the GMGR of
the channel neither of the transmitters require any CSI. Thus,
in what follows, without loss of generality, we shall consider
the Mi > Nj=i case only.

3

4

The detailed proof of this result is provided in [11] and is not
included here due to space restrictions. Intuitively, the left hand
side of (11) can be shown to be equal to I(Ui ; Yj |Xj , Wi ), i.e.,
the contribution of the private message Ui at receiver j. As a
result, if the transmitter knows the null space of the cross link
it can direct the private message into the null-space so that its
contribution is limited at receiver j.
Consequently, knowledge of CSI at the transmitters boils
down to the knowledge of a particular subspace, Si . However,
to feedback Si exactly to T xi , Rxj still requires an inﬁnite
number of feedback bits when Mi > Nj . On the other hand,
since Si is a subspace of CMi , it can be thought of as a point
in a Grassmann manifold which we deﬁne next.
Deﬁnition 2 (Grassmann manifold): The
Grassmann
manifold Gn,p is the set of all p-dimensional subspaces
(planes passing through the origin) in the n-dimensional
Euclidean space Cn .
Let Vn,p≤n be the set of p-dimensional bases, of the ndimensional complex space Cn , a point in which can be
represented by an n × p matrix with orthonormal columns.
Then, a point (which represents a particular subspace, say So )
in the Grassmann manifold Gn,p is equivalent to the set of
all n × p orthonormal matrices in Vn,p whose columns span
the same subspace So . Clearly, the matrix representation of a
point in Gn,p is non-unique.
That is, for each channel realization of Hij , Rxj needs to
feedback a point from the corresponding Grassman manifold
to T xi , if Mi > Nj . Using this concept in the next section, we
shall show that it is possible to feedback only an approximate
version of Si represented through a ﬁnite number of feedback
bits and yet satisfy the constraint in (11).

of feedback bits, because it is one of the inﬁnite number of
points lying in the circular region. Our goal in this section is
to represent all the points in the bigger circle, approximately,
by a ﬁnite number of points.
That is, suppose we pack maximum number of nonintersecting smaller circles with a particular radius within the
outer circle and then construct a quantization codebook, Ci ,
whose codewords are the centers of these smaller circles. For
each occurrence of a random point Si , Rxj identiﬁes the
circle whose center or codeword is the nearest among all
the circles and sends back its center to T xi . For example,
consider the area ABCD in the ﬁgure; any point lying in
this region is nearest to the codeword F and thus whenever
Si lies in this area Rxj feeds back the codeword F. This
area ABCD is called the Voronoi region corresponding to the
codeword F. Note that Rxj requires only log(|Ci |) bits to send
the index of the codeword if the codebooks are revealed to
the transmitters before data transmission begins. The required
number of feedback bits can be further reduced if we allow a
smaller number of circles as shown in Fig. 1(b), where clearly
the Voronoi regions are much larger than those in Fig. 1(a).
Essentially, we are approximating all the points within the
Voronoi region of a codeword by that point and the error due to
approximation increases as the Voronoi regions gets larger. For
example, if the approximation error is a monotonic function of
the distance between a point and its codeword, then clearly the
codebook in ﬁgure 1(b) will incur a larger approximation error
than the codebook of ﬁgure 1(a). Evidently, as the number of
codewords and consequently the number of required feedback
bits decreases, the approximation error increases and hence
there is a tradeoff between the two.
Characterization of this tradeoff allows us to evaluate the
minimum number of feedback bits required under the constraint that the approximation error does not go beyond a
threshold value, where the threshold is set according to some
ˆ
requirement. In particular, if Si is approximated by Si and
covariance matrix for the private message of T xi constructed
ˆ
from this approximate point is denoted by Kiu , then we say
that the error is below threshold if

IV. F INITE RATE F EEDBACK
Due to space constraints, we shall provide in what follows
an intuitive picture of how the Grassmann manifold is quantized and the corresponding ﬁnite rate feedback scheme.

†
ˆ
log det INi + ρij Hij Kiu Hij

(a)

≤ ci ,
ˆ

where ci is independent of ρij . This choice of the threshold
ˆ
gives us the minimum number of feedback bits required to
achieve the GMGR of the channel which is stated in the
following theorem.
Theorem 2: For
each
channel
realization,
(Nj (Mi − Nj )+ ) αij log(ρ) number of feedback bits
from Rxj to T xi are sufﬁcient to achieve the perfect CSIT
GMGR of the (M1 , N1 , M2 , N2 ) MIMO IC. In particular,
if the feedback bits are used to send an approximate copy
of the subspace Si following the feedback scheme described
below then the corresponding coding scheme can achieve the
entire perfect CSIT GMGR of the channel.

(b)

Fig. 1: Voronoi regions for a circular area.
The problem that we deal with in this section can be
conceptually explained by Fig. 1(a). Suppose for Mi > Nj , the
outer circle represents the Grassmann manifold GMi ,(Mi −Nj ) .
For a given channel realization, Si represents an arbitrary point
in the circular region of Fig. 1(a). From the previous discussion
we know that, in the HK∗ scheme T xi needs to know Si , to
achieve the perfect CSIT GMGR of the channel. However,
to send this point exactly, Rxj requires an inﬁnite number

V. GMGR WITHOUT CSIT
In this section, we shall derive the GMGR of the MIMO IC
without CSIT for some speciﬁc antenna conﬁgurations. The

4

5

converse is based on the F-CSIT result derived in previous
sections, since as a set of multiplexing gain tuples the GMG
region of the MIMO IC with F-CSIT is a superset which
contains the GMG region of the MIMO IC without CSIT.
The achievable schemes are different for different antenna
conﬁgurations considered but can achieve the converse bounds
without CSIT. We start with the case when Mi ≤ Nj for both
i = j ∈ {1, 2}.
Corollary 1: Consider the (M1 , N1 , M2 , N2 ) MIMO IC
with channel parameter α and Nj ≥ Mi for all i = j ∈ {1, 2}.
¯
The No-CSIT GMGR, MNo-CSIT1 (¯ ), on this channel is
α
identical to the perfect CSIT GMGR, i.e.,
MNo-CSIT1 (¯ ) = Mo (¯ ).
α
α

CSI feedback is characterized. Moreover, the No-CSIT GMGR
of two classes of MIMO ICs is given where the lack of CSIT
does not reduce the achievable GMGR with respect to the
perfect CSIT scenario. An interesting problem in this direction
is to analyze the no CSIT GMGR of the channel for the general
case and characterize the loss (in terms of multiplexing gain)
due to lack of CSIT. Some preliminary work in this direction
have been reported recently in [13].
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Etkin, D. Tse, and H. Wang, “Gaussian interference channel capacity
to within one bit,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Th., vol. 54, pp. 5534–5562,
Dec, 2008.
[2] S. Karmakar and M. K. Varanasi, “The capacity region of the MIMO
interference channel and its reciprocity to within a constant gap,” May,
2011, preprint, available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.0267.
[3] E. Telatar and D. N. C. Tse, “Bounds on the capacity region of a class
of interference channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inform. Th., Jun,
2007.
[4] S. Karmakar and M. K. Varanasi, “The Generalized Degrees of Freedom
Region of the MIMO Interference Channel,” Mar, 2011, preprint,
available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1103.2560.
[5] C. S. Vaze and M. K. Varanasi, “The degrees of freedom regions of
MIMO broadcast, interference, and cognitive radio channels with no
CSIT,” Sept. 2009, available Online: http://arxiv.org/abs/0909.5424.
[6] A. M. Tulino and S. Verdu, Random Matrix Theory and Wireless
Communications. Now, 2004.
[7] L. Zhao, W. Mo, Y. Ma, and Z. Wang, “Diversity and Multiplexing
Tradeoff in General Fading Channels,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Th.,
vol. 53, pp. 1549–1557, Apr, 2007.
[8] S. Karmakar and M. K. Varanasi, “The diversity-multiplexing tradeoff
of the symmetric MIMO 2-user interference channel,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. on Inform. Th., Austin, Texas, Jun, 2010.
[9] ——, “The diversity-multiplexing tradeoff of the MIMO Z interference
channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inform. Th., Austin, Texas, Jun,
2010.
[10] L. Zheng and D. Tse, “Diversity and multiplexing: A fundamental
tradeoff in multiple antenna channels,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Th.,
vol. 49, pp. 1073–1096, May, 2003.
[11] S. Karmakar and M. K. Varanasi, “The generalized multiplexing
gain region of the slow-fading MIMO interference channel and its
achievability with limited feedback,” June, 2012, preprint, available at
http://www.arxiv.org.
[12] A. Raja and P. Viswanath, “Diversity-multiplexing tradeoff of the
two-user interference channel,” Sep, 2009, preprint, available at
http://www.arxiv.org.
[13] C. S. Vaze, S. Karmakar, and M. K. Varanasi, “On the generalized
degrees of freedom region of the MIMO interference channel with
No CSIT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inform. Th., Saint Petersburg,
Russia, July, 2011.

(13)

Proof: Follows from Theorem 2.
Remark 2: In [12] the DMT of the 2-user SISO IC with
α12 = α21 = α and α11 = α22 = 1 was derived which also
characterizes the MGR of the channel. When specialized to the
case with M1 = N1 = M2 = N2 = 1 and α12 = α21 = α,
the above theorem recovers this MGR region of the 2-user
SISO IC. From the DMT perspective however, the analysis of
[12] is more general because it characterizes the fundamental
diversity order at all multiplexing gain pairs too.
If we restrict ourselves to the symmetric IC with stronger
interference than the desired signal, then the No-CSIT GMGR
result can be extended to more general antenna conﬁgurations
as characterized by the next theorem.
Theorem 3: Consider the (M1 , N1 , M2 , N2 ) MIMO IC
with α = [1, α, α, 1] where α ≥ 1 and either M1 ≤ N2 ≤ N1
¯
or M2 ≤ N1 ≤ N2 .
• The GMG region of such a MIMO IC without CSIT is
given as
MNo-CSIT2 (¯ ) = (r1 , r2 ) : r1 ≤ min {M1 , N1 } ;
α
r2 ≤ min M2 ;
(r1 + r2 ) ≤ min{D3 , D4 }; ,

•

where D3 and D4 are as deﬁned in the 3rd and 4th
inequalities in Theorem 1, respectively.
The entire GMGR can be achieved, using the
1
1
HK 0M1 , M1 IM1 , 0M2 , M2 IM2 coding scheme.

Proof: The detailed proof can be found in [11].
Intuitively, when M1 ≤ N2 ≤ N1 , T x1 sends only a public
message since the cross-link has no null space and α ≥ 1.
Therefore, Rx2 can decode both the message of T x1 and
T x2 completely. Moreover, since Rx1 has a larger receive
dimension than Rx2 , Rx1 can decode both the messages as
well. So, T x2 can also send only a public message and thus
does not need to use its cross-link null space. Hence, neither
of the transmitters need any CSI to achieve the perfect CSIT
GMGR of the channel.
VI. C ONCLUSION
The generalized multiplexing gain region of the two-user
slow fading MIMO interference channel (IC) with perfect
CSIT is established. The number of feedback bits required per
channel realization to achieve this region with only quantized

5

