Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.02:1645
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Wed May  2 16:46:07 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:46 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      2846815 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569556327

Optimal Save-Then-Transmit Protocol for Energy
Harvesting Wireless Transmitters
†

Shixin Luo† , Rui Zhang†‡ , and Teng Joon Lim†
ECE Department, National University of Singapore. e-mails: {shixin.luo,elezhang,eleltj}@nus.edu.sg
‡
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore.

a water-ﬁlling energy allocation solution where the so-called
water levels follow a staircase function was proved to be
optimal.
An information theoretic analysis of energy harvesting
communication systems has been provided in [8], [9]. In [8],
the authors proved that the capacity of the AWGN channel
with stochastic energy arrivals is equal to the capacity with an
average power constraint equal to the average recharge rate.
This work has been extended in [9] to the fading Gaussian
channels with perfect/no channel state information at the
transmitter.
Due to the theoretical intractability of online power scheduling under the energy causality constraint (cumulative energy
consumed is not allowed to exceed the cumulative energy
harvested at every point in time), most current research is
focused on an ofﬂine strategy with deterministic channel and
energy state information, which is not practical and can only
provide an upper bound on system performance.
In this paper, we consider a wireless system with one
transmitter and one receiver, with the transmitter using a
save-then-transmit (ST) protocol (see Fig. 1) to deliver Q
bits within T seconds, the duration of a transmission frame.
Because rechargeable energy storage devices (ESDs) cannot
both charge and discharge simultaneously , which is termed
the energy half-duplex constraint in this paper, an energy
harvesting transmitter needs two ESDs, which we call the main
ESD (MESD) and secondary ESD (SESD). The transmitter
draws power from the MESD for data transmission, over
which time the SESD is connected to the energy source and
charges up. At the end of transmission for a frame, the SESD
transfers its stored energy to the MESD. A fraction ρ (called
the save-ratio) of every frame interval is used exclusively
for energy harvesting by the MESD1 . The energy storage
efﬁciency, denoted by η, of each ESD may not be 100 percent,
and a ﬁxed amount of power Pc is assumed to be consumed
by the transmitter hardware whenever it is powered up. The
frame interval T is assumed to be small relative to the time
constant of changes in the ESD charging rate (or energy arrival
rate). The energy arrival rate is therefore modeled as a random
variable X in Joules/second which is assumed to be constant
over a frame.
Under the above realistic conditions, we minimize the

Abstract—In this paper, the design of a wireless communication
device relying exclusively on energy harvesting is considered. Due
to the inability of rechargeable energy sources to charge and
discharge at the same time, a constraint we term the energy
half-duplex constraint, two rechargeable energy storage devices
(ESDs) are assumed so that at any given time, there is always one
ESD being recharged. The energy harvesting rate is a random
variable that is constant over the time interval of interest. A savethen-transmit (ST) protocol is introduced, in which a fraction of
time ρ (dubbed the save ratio) is devoted exclusively to energy
harvesting, with the remaining fraction 1 − ρ used for data
transmission. The ratio of the energy obtainable from an ESD
to the energy harvested is termed the ESD efﬁciency, η. We
address the practical case of the secondary ESD being a battery
with η < 1, and the main ESD being a super-capacitor with
η = 1. The optimal save-ratio that minimizes outage probability
is derived, from which some useful design guidelines are drawn.
Numerical results are provided to validate our proposed study.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The operation of communication networks powered either
largely or exclusively by renewable sources has become
increasingly attractive, both due to the increased desire to
reduce energy consumption in human activities at large, and
due to necessity brought about by the concept of networking
heterogeneous devices ranging from medical sensors on/in the
human body to environment sensors in the wilderness [1],
[2]. Sensor nodes are powered by batteries that often cannot
be replaced because of the inaccessibility of the devices.
Therefore, once the battery of a sensor node is exhausted, the
node dies. Thus the potentially maintenance-free and virtually
perpetual operation offered by energy harvesting, whereby
energy is extracted from the environment, is appealing.
The availability of an inexhaustible but unreliable energy
source changes a system designer’s options considerably, compared to the conventional cases of an inexhaustible reliable energy source (powered by the grid), and an exhaustible reliable
energy source (powered by batteries). There has been recent
research on understanding data packet scheduling with an
energy harvesting transmitter that has a rechargeable battery,
most of which employed a deterministic energy harvesting
model. In [3], the transmission time for a given amount of data
is minimized through power control based on known energy
arrivals over all time. Structural properties of the optimum
solution were then used to establish a fast search algorithm.
This work has been extended to battery limited cases in
[4], and battery imperfections in [5]. Energy harvesting with
channel fading has been investigated in [6] and [7], wherein

1 Note that the energy source can be connected only to either the SESD or
the MESD, but not both.

1

Fig. 1.

Save-Then-Transmit (ST) Protocol

Fig. 2.

outage probability (to be deﬁned in the next section) over
ρ, when transmitting over a block fading channel with an
arbitrary fading distribution. In this work, we particularize to
the case where the MESD is a high-efﬁciency super-capacitor
with η = 1, and the SESD is a low-efﬁciency rechargeable
battery with 0 < η < 1. Other conﬁgurations of the MESD
and SESD will be considered in future work.

For any frame, the ST protocol (cf. Fig. 1) is described as
follows:
• During time interval (0, ρT ], harvested energy accumulates in the MESD, which corresponds to the situation
that switches b, c are open and a connects to the MESD
in Fig. 2;
• From time ρT to T , the transmitter is powered on for
transmission with energy from the MESD. We assume
all the buffered energy in the MESD is used up for
transmission in each frame. Since the MESD cannot
charge and discharge at the same time, the SESD starts
to store up harvested energy while the transmitter is on.
Referring to Fig. 2, c is closed, b is open and a switches
to the SESD;
• At time T , the transmitter completes the transmission and
powers off. The SESD transfers all its buffered energy to
the MESD within a negligible charging time, at efﬁciency
η. In other words, b is closed and switch a, c are open
in Fig. 2.
The rate at which the ESDs are charged by the renewable energy source is modeled as a random variable X Joules/second
(J/s). This is justiﬁed by the assumption that the transmission
frame interval T is much smaller than the time constant of
changes in energy availability, e.g., changes in solar or wind
energy availability occur on a time scale of seconds, whereas
T is typically on the order of fractions of a second. Therefore
the random process X(t) representing ESD recharge rate at
time t is reasonably assumed to be constant over each window
of T seconds.

II. S YSTEM M ODEL
A. Deﬁnitions and Assumptions
The block diagram of the system is given in Fig. 2. The
energy recovered from the environment2 replenishes either the
MESD or the SESD at any given time, as indicated by switch
a. The MESD powers the transmitter directly and usually has
high power density, good recycle ability and high efﬁciency,
e.g. a super-capacitor [10]. Since the MESD cannot charge and
discharge simultaneously, a SESD (e.g. rechargeable battery)
stores up harvested energy while the transmitter is on, and
transfers all its stored energy to the MESD once the transmitter
is off. We assume in the rest of this paper that the SESD is a
battery with an efﬁciency η, where η ∈ [0, 1]. This means
that a fraction η of the energy transferred into the SESD
during charging can be subsequently recovered during discharging. Other conﬁgurations of battery/supercapacitor and
MESD/SESD will be considered in our future work.
We assume that Q bits of data are generated and must be
transmitted within a time slot of duration T seconds (i.e.,
delay constrained). In the proposed ST protocol, the save-ratio
ρ is the reserved fraction of time for energy harvesting by
the MESD within one transmission slot. In other words, data
delivery only takes place in the last (1 − ρ)T seconds of each
Q
time slot, which results in an effective rate of Reﬀ = (1−ρ)T
bits/sec. We also allow for a constant power consumption of Pc
Watts by the transmitter hardware whenever it is powered on.
The combined inﬂuence of ρ, η and Pc on outage probability
is quantiﬁed in this work.
Assume a block-fading frequency-nonselective channel,
where the channel is constant over the time slot T . Over any
time slot, the baseband-equivalent channel output is given by
y = h · x + n,

B. Outage Probability
It is clear that X is a non-negative random variable with
ﬁnite support, i.e. 0 ≤ X ≤ PH < ∞, as the maximum
amount of power one can extract from any source is ﬁnite.
Suppose fX (x) and FX (x) represent its probability density
function (PDF) and cumulative distribution function (CDF),
respectively. According to the proposed ST protocol, the total
buffered energy in the MESD at t = ρT (the start of data
transmission within a transmission slot) is given by

(1)

ET = X [ρ + η(1 − ρ)] T.
(2)
[
]
ρ
ET
Denote P = (1−ρ)T = X 1−ρ + η as the average transmission power, which is constant over the entire transmission
period, and Pc as the circuit power (i.e. the power consumed

where x is the transmitted signal, y is the received signal,
and n is i.i.d. circularly symmetric complex Gaussian (CSCG)
2
noise with zero mean and variance σn .
2 Wind,

Energy Harvesting Circuit Model

solar, geothermal, etc.

2

2

by the hardware during data transmission), again assumed constant. The mutual information of the channel (1) conditioned
on X and the channel gain h is (assuming P > Pc )

III. O UTAGE M INIMIZATION
In this section, we design the save-ratio ρ for the ST
protocol by solving the optimization problem

(
)
(P − Pc )|h|2
RT = log2 1 +
= log2 (1 + (P − Pc )Γ)
2
σz
(3)
|h|2
where Γ = σ2 with PDF fΓ (·) and CDF FΓ (·).
z
For a transmitter with energy harvesting capability and
working under the ST protocol, the outage event is the
union of two mutually exclusive events: Circuit Outage and
Channel Outage. Circuit Outage occurs when the MESD has
insufﬁcient energy stored up at t = ρT to even power on the
hardware for the duration of transmission i.e. ET < Pc (1−ρ)T
or equivalent P < Pc . Channel outage is deﬁned as the MESD
having sufﬁcient stored energy but the channel realization does
Q
not support the required target rate Reﬀ = (1−ρ)T bits/s.
Recalling that X ∈ [0, PH ], the probabilities of Circuit
Outage and Channel Outage are therefore:
circuit
Pout
= Pr {P < Pc }
{
FX [ϕ(·)] if PH > ϕ(·)
=
1
otherwise.

(P1) :

(4)

(5)

A. Ideal System: η = 1 and Pc = 0

Q
(1−ρ)T

2
−1
where g(ρ, η, Pc ) = x[ ρ +η]−Pc and ϕ(ρ, η, Pc ) = ρPc+η .
1−ρ
1−ρ
Since Circuit Outage and Channel Outage are mutually exclusive, it follows that

Suppose that circuit power is negligible, i.e. all the energy
is spent on transmission, and the SESD has perfect energyρ
transfer efﬁciency. The condition PH > Pc /( 1−ρ + η) is
always satisﬁed, and problem (P1) is simpliﬁed to
]
[
Q
∫ PH
(2 (1−ρ)T − 1)(1 − ρ)
(P2) : min.
fX (x)FΓ
dx
0≤ρ≤1
x
0

(6)

∗
where the optimal value of (P2) is denoted as Pout (1, 0), and
∗
the optimal save-ratio is denoted as ρ (1, 0).
Lemma 3.1: The minimum outage probability when η = 1
and Pc = 0 is given by
[ Q/T
]
∫ PH
2
−1
∗
fX (x)FΓ
dx
(8)
Pout (1, 0) =
x
0

For convenience, we deﬁne
∫
ˆ
Pout (ρ, η, Pc ) = FX [ϕ(·)] +

PH

fX (x)FΓ [g(·)] dx

Pout

i.e. optimize average outage performance Pout in (6) over ρ,
for any given η ∈ [0, 1] and Pc ∈ [0, ∞). Due to the complex
form of Pout in (6), numerical methods must be used to solve
(P1). In general, the problem is not convex.
Denote the optimal (minimum) outage probability as
∗
Pout (η, Pc ) and the optimal save-ratio as ρ∗ (η, Pc ). Note that
ρ ↗ 1 represents transmission of a very short burst at the
end of each frame, and the rest of each frame is reserved
for MESD energy harvesting. ρ = 0 is another special case,
in which the energy consumed in frame i was collected (by
the SESD) entirely in frame i − 1. (P1) can always be solved
through numerical search, but it is challenging to give a closed
form solution for ρ∗ (η, Pc ) in terms of Pc and η in general.
We will instead analyze how ρ∗ (η, Pc ) varies with Pc and η
and thereby get some insights in the rest of this section.
Proposition 3.1: Pout (ρ, η, Pc ) in (6) is a non-increasing
function of battery efﬁciency η and a non-decreasing function
of circuit power Pc for ρ ∈ [0, 1). The optimal value of (P1)
∗
Pout (η, Pc ) is strictly decreasing with η and strictly increasing
with Pc .
The proof of proposition 3.1 is omitted because of space
limitations, but its intuition is clear: If η grows, the energy
available to the transmitter can only grow or remain the
same, whatever the values of ρ and Pc , hence Pout must be
non-increasing with η; if Pc grows, the energy available for
transmission decreases, leading to higher Pout .

channel
Pout
= Pr {log2 (1 + (P − Pc )Γ) < Reﬀ , P > Pc }
{
}
2Reff − 1
= Pr Γ <
, P > Pc
P − Pc
 ∫ PH

fX (x)FΓ [g(·)] dx if PH > ϕ(·)
=
ϕ(·)

0
otherwise.

circuit
channel
Pout = Pout
+ Pout

FX [ϕ(·)] +
 ∫
PH
=
f (x)FΓ [g(·)] dx if PH > ϕ(·)
 ϕ(·) X
1
otherwise.

min.

0≤ρ≤1

(7)

ϕ(·)

and is achieved with the save-ratio ρ∗ (1, 0) = 0.
Proof: Please refer to the journal version of this paper
[11].
Lemma 3.1 indicates that the optimal strategy for a transmitter that uses no power to operate its circuitry powered by two
ESDs with 100 percent efﬁciency, is to transmit continuously3 .

ˆ
where Pout (ρ, η, Pc ) < 1 and PH > ϕ(·).
Unlike the conventional deﬁnition of outage probability in
a block fading channel, which is dependent only on the fading
distribution and a ﬁxed average transmit power constraint, in
an energy harvesting system with block fading and the ST
protocol, both transmit power and channel are random, and
the resulting outage is thus a function of the save-ratio ρ, the
battery efﬁciency η and the circuit power Pc .

3 Except for the time needed in each slot to transfer energy from the SESD
to the MESD, which we assume to be negligible.

3

3

This is not surprising because the SESD collects energy from
the environment just as efﬁciently as the MESD does, and
so idling the transmitter while the MESD harvests energy
wastes transmission resources (time) while not reaping any
gains (energy harvested). However, we will see that this is
only true when there is no circuit power and perfect storage
efﬁciency.
B. Inefﬁcient Battery: η < 1 and Pc = 0
When the SESD energy transfer efﬁciency η < 1 and Pc =
0, (P1) becomes
]
[
Q
∫ PH
(2 (1−ρ)T − 1)
dx
(P3) : min.
fX (x)FΓ
ρ
0≤ρ≤1
x( 1−ρ + η)
0

Fig. 3.

∗
Pout (η, 0),

where the optimal value of (P3) is denoted as
and
the optimal save-ratio is denoted as ρ∗ (η, 0).
Lemma 3.2: When SESD energy transfer efﬁciency η < 1
and circuit power Pc = 0, the optimal save-ratio ρ has the
following properties.
1) It is non-zero only for small η:
)
[ Q

 ∗
2

η ∈ Q T −1 Q , 1
 ρ (η, 0) = 0,
2)
[ 2 T (ln Q T )
(9)
 ∗
2 T −1
 ρ (η, 0) > 0,
η ∈ 0, Q

Q

recover enough energy (with non-zero probability) to power on
the transmitter, i.e. ρ ∈ [0, 1). If PH ≤ Pc , by condition PH ≤
η
Pc
ρ
1−ρ +η

, save-ratio ρ is required to be larger than
summary,
• If Pc < PH η
ˆ
Pout = Pout (ρ, η, Pc ),
•

2 T (ln 2) T

2) ρ∗ (η, 0) is a non-increasing function of η, for 0 ≤ η ≤ 1.
Proof: Please refer to [11].
According to (9), if the SESD efﬁciency is above a threshold, the increased energy available to the transmitter if the
MESD rather than the SESD collects energy over [0, ρT ] is
not sufﬁcient to overcome the extra energy required to transmit
at the higher rate Reﬀ over (ρT, T ]. The result is that the
optimal ρ is 0. On the other hand, if η is below that threshold,
then some amount of time should be spent harvesting energy
using the higher-efﬁciency MESD even at the expense of
losing transmission time. Lemma 3.2 quantiﬁes precisely the
interplay among η, Q, T and ρ.
We should note here that even though we consider the
case of having two ESD’s, by setting η = 0, we effectively
remove the SESD and hence our analysis applies also to the
single-ESD case. According to (9), if we only have one ESD,
the optimal save ratio is ρ∗ (0, 0), which is always larger
than 0. This is intuitively sensible, because with only one
ESD obeying the energy half-duplex constraint, it would be
impossible to transmit all the time (ρ = 0) because that would
leave no time at all for energy harvesting.

ρ (η, Pc ) >

1−ρ

Therefore, if PH >

Pc
η ,

−η

P
1−η+ P c

. In

H

∀ρ ∈ [0, 1)

ρ≤
ρ>

Pc
PH

−η

P
1−η+ P c
Pc
PH

H

−η

(10)

P
1−η+ P c
H

Pc
PH

−η

P
1−η+ P c

due to the needs of offsetting circuit

H

power consumption. If Pc < ηPH , theoretically, the transmitter is able to recover enough energy (with non-zero probability
for all ρ ∈ [0, 1)) to transmit.
Lemma 3.3: For an energy harvesting transmitter with battery efﬁciency η and ﬁnite circuit power Pc ,
Q

2T − 1
Pc
< Q
η−
PH
2 T (ln 2) Q
T

=⇒ ρ∗ (η, Pc ) > 0.

(11)

Proof: Please refer to [11].
Intuitively, the smaller the circuit power is, the more energy we can spend on transmission; the larger the battery
efﬁciency is, the more energy we can recover from energy
harvesting. Small circuit power and high battery efﬁciency
suggests continuous transmission (ρ∗ (η, Pc ) = 0), which is
consistent with our intuition. According to Lemma 3.3, larger
circuit power may be compensated by larger ESD efﬁciency
(when the threshold for η is smaller than 1). A non-zero save
ratio is only desired if there exists signiﬁcant circuit power to
be offset or substantial ESD inefﬁciency to be compensated.
The threshold depends on required transmission rate.

Non-zero circuit power Pc leads to two mutually exclusive
effects: (i) zero probability of powering on the transmitter for
the (1−ρ)T duration of transmission – this is when PH < ϕ(·)
in (6); and (ii) higher outage probability if PH > ϕ(·) because
some power is devoted to running the hardware.
Since ρPc+η decreases as ρ increases, its maximum value
Pc
η .

If Pc ≥ PH η

 1,

Pout =
 P (ρ, η, P ),
 ˆout
c

Pc
PH

If Pc ≥ ηPH , referring to (10), we may conclude that
∗

C. Finite Circuit Power: η ≤ 1, Pc > 0

is

Optimal save-ratio ρ∗

IV. N UMERICAL E XAMPLES
To obtain numerical results, we assume that the energy
harvesting rate X follows a uniform distribution within [0, 100]

the transmitter would be able to
4

4

Fig. 4.

∗
Optimal outage probability Pout

Fig. 5.

(i.e., PH = 100 J/s), and the channel is Rayleigh fading with
exponentially distributed Γ with parameter λ = 0.02. We also
assume the target transmission rate Rreq = Q = 2 bits/s.4 .
T
Fig. 3 demonstrates how battery efﬁciency η and circuit
power Pc would affect the optimal save-ratio ρ∗ . As observed,
larger Pc and smaller η would result in larger ρ∗ , i.e. shorter
transmission time. Since the increment is more substantial
along Pc axis, circuit power Pc has a larger inﬂuence on
the optimal save-ratio compared with battery efﬁciency η.
ρ∗ (1, 0) = 0 veriﬁes the result of Lemma 3.1 for an ideal
system, while ρ∗ (η, 0) along the line Pc = 0 demonstrates
the “phase transition” behavior stated in Lemma 3.2. Fig. 4
∗
∗
gives Pout (η, Pc ). Consistent with Proposition 3.1, Pout (η, Pc )
is monotonically decreasing with battery efﬁciency η and
monotonically increasing with circuit power Pc . Again, Pc
affects outage performance more signiﬁcantly then η. From
Fig. 4, we see that for a reasonable outage probability e.g.
below 0.05, Pc has to be small and η has to be close to 1.
Our results can be used to ﬁnd the feasible region in the η-Pc
plane for a given allowable Pout . Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 compare the
outage performance before and after optimization. We can see
that optimizing over save-ratio signiﬁcantly improves system
performance.

Fig. 6.

Outage performance comparison:

Pc
PH

= 0.5

Outage performance comparison: η = 0.8

[2] I. F. Akyidiz, W. Su, Y. S. Subramaniam, and E. Cayirei, “A survey on
sensor networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 40, pp. 102-114, August
2002.
[3] J. Yang and S. Ulukus, “Optimal packet scheduling in an energy
harvesting communication system,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.60, no.
1, pp. 220-230, Jan. 2012.
[4] K. Tutuncuoglu and A. Yener, “Optimum transmission policies for battery limited energy harvesting nodes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1180-1189, Mar. 2012.
[5] B. Devillers and D. Gunduz, “A general framework for the optimization
of energy harvesting communication systems with battery imperfections,” submitted for publication. Available at [arXiv:1109.5490].
[6] O. Ozel, K. Tutuncuoglu, J. Yang, S. Ulukus, and A. Yener, “Transmission with energy harvesting nodes in fading wireless channels: optimal
policies,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1732-1743,
Sep. 2011.
[7] C. K. Ho and R. Zhang, “Optimal energy allocation for wireless communications with energy harvesting constraints,” submitted for publication.
Available at [arXiv:1103.5290].
[8] O. Ozel and S. Ulukus, “Information-theoretic analysis of an energy
harvesting communication system,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, Sep. 2010.
[9] R. Rajesh, V. Sharma, and P. Viswanath, “Capaciy of fading Gaussian
channel with an energy harvesting sensor node,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (Globecom), Dec. 2011.
[10] M. Jayalakshmi and K. Balasubramanian, “Simple capacitors to supercapacitors - an overview,” Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 1196-1217,
2008.
[11] S. Luo, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim, “Optimal save-then-transmit protocol
for energy harvesting wireless transmitters,” submitted for publication.
Available at [arXiv:1204.1240].

V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied a wireless system under practical
energy harvesting conditions. Assuming a general model with
non-ideal energy storage efﬁciency and transmit circuit power,
we proposed a Save-then-Transmit (ST) protocol to optimize
the system outage performance via ﬁnding the optimal saveratio. We characterized how the optimal save-ratio and the
minimum outage probability vary with practical system parameters. Both analytical and numerical results provide useful
guidelines for practical system design.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Sinha and A. Chandrakasan, “Dynamic power management in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Design Test Comp., vol. 18, no. 2, pp.
62-74, Mar./Apr. 2001.
4 This is normalized to a bandwidth of 1 Hz, i.e. R
req is the spectral
efﬁciency.

5

5

