Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.16:1104
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Wed May 16 11:04:14 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:54:45 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      708046 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566865

Code Design for Very Noisy Relay Channels
Puripong Suthisopapan† , Kenta Kasai‡ , Anupap Meesomboon†∗ , Virasit Imtawil† and Kohichi Sakaniwa‡
†

‡

Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Khon Kaen University, Thailand 40002
Dept. of Communications and Integrated Systems, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 152-8550 Tokyo, Japan
Email: mr.puripong@gmail.com,kenta@comm.ss.titech.ac.jp,{anupap,virasit}@kku.ac.th
∗
,sakaniwa@comm.ss.titech.ac.jp
corresponding author

of length 105 bits can perform within 1 ∼ 1.5 dB from the
achievable rate of relay channel [3], [6], [7]. Unfortunately,
there is a limit on the size of code length in wireless communication with delay constraint. The large code lengths lead
to the transmission latency and complex decoders which are
not preferable in the real world communication. It is thus quite
impractical to build such a coded relay system with the current
wireless technologies in which short code lengths (102 ∼ 103
bits) are feasible.
In this paper, we focus our attention on nonbinary LDPC
(NBLDPC) codes deﬁned over GF(28 ) with regular paritycheck matrix of column weight 2. This is motivated by
the outstanding performance at short code lengths with the
simplest form of regular parity-check matrix [8], [9]. The
concept of multiplicative repetition is applied for designing the
simple relay coding strategy. We demonstrate that the proposed
strategy is the promising technique for capturing relaying gain
at low SNRs. This is illustrated via the simulation under
practical constraints such as equal time-sharing and static
power allocation. Based on the simulation results, the proposed
technique can be used to enable reliable relay communication
in very noisy case (using a bit error rate of 10−5 as the reliable
communication).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The NBLDPC
codes are introduced in Section II. In Section III, the system
model for NBLDPC coded half duplex relaying is described.
In Section IV, we discuss an appropriate static power allocation
and develop a simple NBLDPC coding strategy which applicable to very noisy relay channel. In Section V, we present the
simulation performance of the proposed relay coding strategy
at short to medium code lengths. The conclusions are ﬁnally
given in Section VI.

Abstract—From an information-theoretic point of view, it is
well known that the capacity of relay channel comprising of
three terminals is much more than that of two terminal direct
channel especially for low SNRs. Previously invented relay coding
strategies have not been designed to achieve this enormous
capacity occurring in the low SNR region. In this paper, we
propose a simple coding strategy for a relay channel with low
SNRs or, equivalently, for a very noisy relay channel. The
multiplicative repetition is utilized to design this simple coding
strategy. We claim that the proposed strategy is simple since
the destination and the relay can decode with almost the same
computational complexity by sharing the same structure of
decoder. An appropriate static power allocation which yields the
maximum throughput close to the optimal one in low SNRs is
suggested. Under practical constraints such as equal time-sharing
etc., the asymptotic performance of this simple strategy is within
0.5 dB from the achievable rate of relay channel. Furthermore,
the performance at short code lengths enjoys a relaying gain by
approximately 1.4 dB.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A three terminals relay channel [1], which consists of a
source (S), a relay (R) and a destination (D), is an elementary
component of a cooperative network. By using the decodeand-forward protocol, R is capable to decode the received
signal and forward the decoded information to the D. This
protocol yields the signiﬁcant increase in the capacity comparing to that of a direct transmission when the quality of S-R
link is good [2]. At the present moment, full-duplex relaying
is still impractical since (R) cannot receive and transmit
simultaneously with good quality at the same time [3]. We
therefore focus our study on the time-division based halfduplex relaying since this system is regarded as more practical.
Throughout this paper, we simply refer to this type of system
with decode-and-forward protocal as relay channel.
By using the information theoretic tool [4], it can be observed that the increase in capacity with the cost of employing
relay (relaying gain) is very large especially at low to medium
signal to noise ratios (SNRs) [5]. The recent progress on
the development of relay coding strategies which offer the
excellent performance in medium SNRs can be found in [3],
[6], [7] while the efﬁcient strategy to capture the relaying
gain in low SNRs has not been proposed. We thus focus our
attention on designing the coding strategy for low SNRs.
In order to function close to the theoretical limit of relay
channel, we have to deal with the coding strategy of very large
code lengths (104 ∼ 105 bits). For example, at medium SNRs,
the optimized binary low density parity-check (BLDPC) codes

II. I NTRODUCTION TO N ONBINARY LDPC C ODE
An NBLDPC code C over GF(2m ) is deﬁned by the nullspace of a sparse M × N parity-check matrix H = (hij )
deﬁned over GF(2m ) [8]
C = {x ∈ GF(2m )N | Hx = 0 ∈ GF(2m )M },

(1)

where x = (x1 , . . . , xN ) is a codeword. The ith parity-check
equation for i = 1, . . . , M is written as hi1 x1 + hi2 x2 + · · · +
hiN xN = 0 where hi1 , . . . , hiN ∈ GF(2m ) are the entries
of ith row of H. The parameter N is the codeword length in
symbol. Assuming H is of full rank, the number of information

1

symbols is given by K = N − M . The coding rate R of any
NBLDPC code can be computed by R = K/N .
An NBLDPC code is called (dv , dc )-regular if the paritycheck matrix of the code has constant column weight dv and
row weight dc . In this paper, only the (dv = 2, dc )-regular
NBLDPC codes deﬁned over GF(28 ) are considered, since,
for point to point channels, they are empirically known as the
best performing codes especially for short code lengths [8],
[9]. We can represent the parity-check matrix of an NBLDPC
code by a Tanner graph with variable and check nodes [10].
Each variable node and check node represents a coded symbol
and a parity-check equation, respectively.

B. Relay Channel Model
Since, in this paper, the binary modulation is assumed and
the relay system is coded by NBLDPC codes, we thus describe
how to transmit the NBLDPC coded symbols xv by using
the binary modulation scheme for v = 1, . . . , N . We can
represent each coded symbol xv ∈ GF(2m ) by using the
binary sequences of length m bits. For each m, we ﬁx a Galois
ﬁeld GF(2m ) with a primitive element α and its primitive
polynomial π. Once a primitive element α of GF(2m ) is
ﬁxed, each symbol is given by an m-bit representation [11,
p. 110]. At the vth output of NBLDPC encoder, each coded
symbol xv ∈ GF(2m ) is mapped to the binary sequence
of m bits (xv,1 , xv,2 , . . . , xv,m ) ∈ GF(2)m according to the
primitive polynomial as described above. The obtained binary
sequence (xv,1 , xv,2 , . . . , xv,m ) ∈ GF(2)m is then mapped
to m modulated signals through the mapper for the binary
transmission.
Following [12], an equivalent physical model of the halfduplex relay system shown in Fig. 1 is illustrated in Fig. 2.
In this model, R is placed on the direct line between S and D.
The distance between S and D is normalized to 1 while the
distance between S and R is denoted by d for d < 1.

III. S YSTEM M ODEL
A. Half Duplex Relay System
In time-division based half-duplex relaying [5], the transmission in relay channel takes place over two time slots of
normalized duration. In the ﬁrst time slot of duration t, S sends
information to R and D. In the second time slot of duration
t′ = 1 − t, R and S send information to D. The ﬁrst time slot
is referred to as broadcast (BC) mode whereas the second
time slot is referred to as multiple-access (MAC) mode. The
parameter t is known as the time-sharing factor. Figure 1
illustrates the transmission in the time-division based halfduplex relay system. Parameters hSD , hSR and hRD generally
represent the channel effects.

D

R

S

1-d

d

Fig. 2. A relay system with S, R and D. R is placed on the direct line between
S and D.
(i)

For ith transmission (consisting of two time slots), let sS,BC
be the modulated binary signals transmitted from S in BC
(i)
mode, let sS,MAC be the modulated binary signals transmitted
(i)
from S in MAC mode and let sR,MAC be the modulated binary
signals transmitted from R in MAC mode. In the similar way,
(i)
(i)
(i)
yD,BC , yD,MAC and yR,BC are deﬁned as the received signals
at given positions and modes. From the notations above, the
received signals at R and D in BC mode can be written as [3]
Fig. 1.

(i)

(i)

(i)

(2)

(i)

The transmission in the time-division half-duplex relay system.

(i)

(i)

(3)

yD,BC = hSD sS,BC + nD,BC ,
yR,BC = hSR sS,BC + nR,BC ,

Assuming that the relay channel is governed by channel
code of rate R with the information of length k bits (the
overall code length is thus n = k/R bits). By using decodeand-forward protocol, the transmission relay system can be
described as follows. In BC mode, S ﬁrstly encodes the
k information bits with a code of length tn and of rate
k
RS,BC = tn . The tn coded bits are transmitted to both R
and D. At the end of BC mode, R decodes its received signals
and the estimation obtained from decoder will be further used
in MAC mode. Meanwhile, D just stores the received signals.
In MAC mode, R transmits another set of t′ n = n − tn bits to
D by using the estimation decoded in BC mode. At the same
time, S also simultaneously sends t′ n bits to D. Finally, D can
decode the received information transmitted in BC mode at
k
k
lower code rate R = RD,MAC = tn+t′ n = n since it receives
the additional information transmitted in the MAC mode.

In MAC mode, the received signal at D is given as
(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

yD,MAC = hSD sS,MAC + hRD sR,MAC + nD,MAC
(i)

(i)

(4)

(i)

where nD,BC , nR,MAC and nD,MAC are AWGN with zero mean
and unit variance. In this paper, we consider only the large
scale path loss. Under this circumstance, |hSD |2 = 1, |hSR |2 =
1
1
2
dα and |hRD | = (1−d)α where α is the path loss exponent. For
a fair comparison with direct transmission (the communication
that consists of S and D), the transmitted powers of S and R
must satisfy an average global power constraint given as [3]
Θ : tPS,BC + t′ (PS,MAC + PR,MAC ) ≤ P,

(5)

where PS,BC is the average transmitted power of S in BC
mode, PS,MAC and PR,MAC are the average transmitted powers

2

of S and R in MAC mode respectively. P is the total transmission power of the relay system. The relationship between the
total transmission power and the signal to noise ratio (SNR)
of the relay system is deﬁned as follows [3].
SNR = tPS,BC + t′ (PS,MAC + PR,MAC ),
= 2REb /N0 ,

B. Power Allocation for Low SNRs and Good Suboptimal
Parameters
Chakrabarti et al. investigated the sensitivity of achievable
rate of half duplex relay channel [5]. This work clearly shows
that the suboptimal parameters which are equal time-sharing
(t =1/2) and completely correlated source in MAC mode
incur the marginal loss marginal in achievable rate. It is
known that the static power allocation, equal time-sharing, and
completely correlated source in MAC mode are quite attractive
from the practical point of view because the design of relay
protocol, scheduling, and synchronization can be simpliﬁed.
Thus, the remaining is to ﬁnd the static power allocation
(power allocation is static for all points of operating SNRs)
that yields a good achievable rate.
We suggest that an appropriate static power allocation
for low SNRs can be computed by averaging the optimal
power allocation in the region of interest. This can be done
as follows : Let g = {g1 , . . . , gb } be the set of discrete
values of SNR. The set of optimal power allocation at S in
∗
BC mode which corresponds to g is denoted by PS,BC =
∗
∗
∗
∗
{PS,BC (g1 ), . . . , PS,BC (gb )}. The sets PS,MAC and PR,MAC
are deﬁned in the same way. The fractions of power at each
mode and terminal calculating from the set of optimal power
allocation are as follows

(6)

where R is the coding rate for the relay channel and Eb /N0
is the the energy per bit to noise power spectral density ratio.
In order to obtain the optimal achievable rate for timedivision half-duplex relay channel with decode-and-forward
protocol, a joint optimization is needed over the correlation in
MAC mode, time-sharing factor and power allocation (see e.g.
[3] for a complete detail of computing an achievable rate).
IV. S IMPLE C ODING S TRATEGY FOR L OW SNR S
It is worth noting that maintaining the reliable communication in low SNRs (or equivalently very noisy channel)
is to deal with low rate channel code. In this section, we
ﬁrst describe the multiplicative repetition which exactly is
the method to construct high performance low rate NBLDPC
codes. After that, the proposed coding strategy and static
power allocation for very noisy relay channel are presented.
A. Multiplicative Repetition
Recently, Kasai et al. proposed an efﬁcient method called
multiplicative repetition to construct low-rate NBLDPC codes
[13]. Over point to point channels, the multiplicatively repeated NBLDPC codes constructed by this method outperform
the previously found low-rate codes. By using the NBLDPC
code of rate R1 , we can easily construct code NBLDPC codes
of lower rate R < R1 as described as follows.
Let C1 denote an NBLDPC code of length N and coding
rate R1 . Since code C1 is used to construct another code, we
refer to C1 as a mother code. A low-rate code C2 of length 2N
1
and coding rate R2 = 2 R1 can be constructed as follows. We
select N coefﬁcients rN +1 , . . . , r2N randomly from GF(2m )\
{0}. Note that we deﬁne rv = 1 ∈ GF(2m ) for v = 1, . . . , N
for simplicity of notation. We then multiplicatively repeat the
coded symbols from C1 with the coefﬁcients to obtain the
lower-rate code C2 as follows.

κS,BC

=

t
κg
t′
κg

b
∑
i=1
b
∑

∗
PS,BC (gi ),
∗
PS,MAC (gi ),

κS,MAC
κR,MAC
where κg =

=

(7)

= 1 − κS,BC − κS,MAC ,

b
∑

i=1

gi . Consequently, the static power allocation

i=1

based on the concept of averaging can be expressed as
tPS,BC
t′ PS,MAC
t′ PR,MAC

= κS,BC SNR,
= κS,MAC SNR,
= κR,MAC SNR.

(8)

Various achievable rates R obtained from the different set
of parameters are displayed in Fig. 3. The direct capacity
is also plotted to illustrate the relaying gain. An optimal
achievable rate (unconstrained input, i.e., Gaussian input) is
the leftmost curve. As we expected from the conclusions
given in [5], an achievable rate from optimal power allocation,
t = 1/2, and r = 1 is very close to the optimal rate at
low SNRs (or equivalently R < 0.4). By using the averaging
concept, suggested above, to ﬁnd the static power allocation,
κS,BC = 0.6456, κS,MAC = 0.0634, and κR,MAC = 0.2910 are
obtained when g = {-16 dB, -15 dB, . . . , -8 dB} is chosen. It
can be seen from the ﬁgure that this static power allocation
together with t = 1/2 and r = 1 can bring the achievable
rate very close to the optimal one. Note that the chosen g is
the set of SNR points in low SNR region, For BPSK input,
this suggested static power allocation offers the relaying gain
in low rates by more than 3 dB. We also show that the equal
power allocation with t = 1/2 and r = 1 is not attractive

C2 = {(x1 , . . . , x2N ) ∈ GF(2m )2N | xN +v = rN +v xv ,
for v = 1, . . . , N , (x1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ C1 }.
In this way, we can construct a (2N, K) code from an (N, K)
code.
The codes C3 , . . . , CT of lower coding rates can also be
constructed from code C1 through the multiplicative repetition process. We refer a parameter T as repetition parameter. For T ≥ 3, in a recursive fashion, N coefﬁcients
r(T −1)N +1 , . . . , rT N are chosen randomly from GF(2m )\{0}.
1
The code CT of rate RT = T R1 can also be constructed as
follows.
CT = {(x1 , . . . , xT N ) ∈ GF(2m )T N |
x(T −1)N +v = r(T −1)N +v xv , for v = 1, . . . , N,
(x1 , . . . , x(T −1)N ) ∈ CT −1 }.

3

time sharing constraint since tn = t′ n. We note that S and R
will send the same coded symbols in this mode if R, in BC
ˆ
mode, did successfully decode the codeword, i.e., xR = x.
This means the additional parity symbols sent from S and R
in this mode are fully correlated.
4) Decoding in MAC mode: At this step, D has two received
(1)
(mN )
signals which are yD,BC , . . . , yD,BC corresponding to codes
(mN +1)
(mT N )
C1 , . . . , CT and yD,MAC , . . . , yD,MAC corresponding to codes
CT +1 , . . . , C2T . The overall 2T N coded symbols or equivalently 2mT N coded bits are now stored at D. The overall code
K
rate of the relay channel is thus R = 2T N . After combining the
received signals from two modes, we note that the decoding
process can be done over the Tanner graph of mother code with
N variable nodes even we have 2T N received information
symbols. This is analogous to the decoding of multiplicative
repeated NBLDPC codes with repetition parameter 2T [13].
ˆ
Finally, D produces an estimated codeword xD ∈ GF(2m )N as
an output.
We claim that the proposed coding strategy is very simple
since the Tanner graphs of decoders at both R and D are the
same, i.e., the Tanner graph of mother code. The difference
of decoding at R and D is only the initialization. Thus, the
computational complexity of the decoders are almost the same
even the code rate at D is lower than that of R.

(though it is simple) since it suffers from the rate loss more
than 2 dB (comparing to optimal rate).

Fig. 3. Various achievable rates obtained from the different set of parameters
with α = 2 and d = 0.5.

C. Proposed Coding Strategy
In this subsection, we develop a simple low rate coding
strategy for equal time-sharing constraint. The proposed low
rate relay coding strategy can be described as follows.
1) Encoding in BC mode: By using a multiplicatively
repeated NBLDPC code of rate RS,BC = TK with T ≥ 1,
N
S encodes K information symbols into a codeword x =
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xT N ) ∈ GF(2m )T N . This codeword x ∈ CT is
mapped to a binary sequence of length tn = mT N bits. Then
the BPSK modulated signals of the binary sequence are sent
to R and D. S also stores the codeword x for using in MAC
mode. Note that the mother code is (N, K) NBLPDC code
and the associated Tanner graph has N variable nodes.
2) Decoding in BC mode: R decodes its received signals by
using the BP algorithm [14]. This is analogous to the decoding
of multiplicative repeated NBLDPC codes with repetition
parameter T (see section III of [13] for decoding algorithm).
ˆ
After BP decoding, R produces an estimated codeword xR ∈
GF(2m )T N . The decoding is accomplished on the Tanner
graph of mother code with N variable nodes. Meanwhile, D
only stores its received signals for the future decoding at the
end of MAC mode.
3) Encoding in MAC mode: By using x
=
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xT N ) ∈ CT stored in BC mode, S ﬁrst generate
(x1 , x2 , . . . , x2T N ) ∈ C2T by using the multiplicative
repetition. S then sends only T N multiplicative symbols
xS = (xT N +1 , xN +2 , . . . , x2T N ) to D. Therefore, the amount
of information sent by S is t′ n = mT N bits.
In the same way, as S produces xS from x, R produces xR ∈
ˆ
GF(2m )T N from xR ∈ GF(2m )T N obtained from decoding
process in BC mode and sends this to D. By doing this, the
amount of information generating in this mode is equal to the
information sent in BC mode. This corresponds to the equal

V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
In this section, we examine the decoding performance of the
proposed coding strategy. For all results, the regular (dv =
2, dc ) NBLDPC codes deﬁned over GF(28 ) are employed.
The FFT-based BP algorithm [14] with the maximum iteration
ℓmax = 100 is used for decoding. The BPSK modulation
is used for all the links in the relay channel. We set the
attenuation exponent to α = 2 and the S-R distance is d = 0.5.
The concept of ﬁnding the static power allocation presented
in the previous section is used for all results.
We ﬁrst assess the proposed coding strategy by using the
Monte Carlo density evolution [15, pp.22-23]. The Monte
Carlo density evolution is a tool for calculating the minimum
SNR of which NBLDPC codes can reliably decode the noisy
received signal by assuming very large code length and cycle
free Tanner graph. This minimum SNR is often known as
the decoding threshold. The Monte Carlo density evolution
for direct transmission is extended to calculate the decoding
threshold of the proposed NBLDPC relay coding strategy and
the decoding thresholds are reported in Table 1. It is obviously
seen that the proposed coding strategy can asymptotically
perform within 0.5 dB from the achievable rate.
After looking at the performance in the limit of large code
length, the performance at ﬁnite code lengths is presented. The
performance of the proposed coding strategy at low SNRs is
shown in Fig. 4. The mother code is regular (2, 3) NBLDPC
codes of rate RS,BC = 1/3. The proposed coding strategy
with R = 1/6 and R = 1/12 is constructed from repetition
parameter T = 1 and T = 2 respectively. At BER of 10−5 , it
can be seen that the proposed coding strategy of information
lengths k = 576 bits (code length n = k/R) performs within

4

TABLE I
T HE DECODING THRESHOLDS OF THE PROPOSED CODING STRATEGY WITH
T = 1 UNDER DIFFERENT MOTHER CODES . T HESE VALUE ARE
CALCULATED UNDER t = 1/2, r = 1, AND SUGGESTED STATIC POWER
ALLOCATION .
R
1/6
1/4
3/10

RS,BC
1/3
1/2
3/5

Min. Eb /N0 (dB)
-4.66
-4.08
-3.71

relaying gain in very noisy relay channel under very practical
constraints. The advantages of the proposed strategy can be
listed as follows: 1) The waterfall performance within 2.3
dB from the achievable rate can be obtained by using the
moderate length NBLDPC codes. 2) We do not need the
code optimization process. We just employ the (2, dc )-regular
NBLDPC deﬁned over GF(28 ) as the channel code. 3) The
FER performances obtained from the (2, dc )-regular NBLDPC
codes are excellent. 4) The relay and the destination can
decode with almost the same computational complexity since
both the relay and the destination use the same Tanner graph
for decoding. 5) The encoding processes for both the source
and the relay in MAC mode are very simple since we employ
the multiplicative repetition which requires only (T − 1)N
multiplications over GF(2m ).

Threshold (dB)
-4.24
-3.62
-3.23

2.3 dB from the achievable rate. The relaying gain, as deﬁned
in introduction, of about 1.4 dB can also be realized by this
short information length. Moreover, it is obviously seen that
the FER performance is very good without employing high
rate algebraic channel code as an outer code.
Although the transmission model in MAC mode described
in (4) is widely used but the signals from S and R must be
coherently combined. This may cause a high complexity of
the receiver. This problem can be easily alleviated by keeping
S silent in MAC mode. In this circumstance, D receives the
additional information of length t′ n only from R. Under the
same constraints, it is seen from Fig. 4 that the proposed
coding strategy with R = 1/6 and silent S in MAC mode
is away from its original performance by about 0.5 dB. We
note that the static power allocation for S in BC mode and R in
MAC mode is also based on the averaging concept presented
in the previous subsection. This proves that the method to ﬁnd
the static power allocation for low SNRs which is suggested
in this paper is very useful.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is ﬁnancially supported by the Telecommunications Research Industrial and Development Institute (TRIDI),
with National Telecommunications Commission (NTC), Grant
No.PHD/009/2552.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. C. van der Meulen, “Three-terminal communication channels,” Advanced Applied Probability, vol. 3, pp. 120–154, 1971.
[2] T. Cover and A. Gamal, “Capacity theorems for the relay channel,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 572 – 584, Sep. 1979.
[3] A. Chakrabarti, A. D. Baynast, A. Sabharwal, and B. Aazhang, “Low
density parity check codes for the relay channel,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 280 –291, Feb. 2007.
[4] M. Khojastepour, A. Sabharwal, and B. Aazhang, “On capacity of
Gaussian ’cheap’ relay channel,” in IEEE GLOBECOM ’03, vol. 3, Dec.
2003, pp. 1776–1780.
[5] A. Chakrabarti, A. Sabharwal, and B. Aazhang, “Sensitivity of achievable rates for half-duplex relay channel,” in 2005 IEEE 6th Workshop
on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications, Jun. 2005,
pp. 970 –974.
[6] J. Cances and V. Meghdadi, “Optimized low density parity check codes
designs for half duplex relay channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 3390 –3395, Jul. 2009.
[7] C. Li, G. Yue, X. Wang, and M. Khojastepour, “LDPC code design for
half-duplex cooperative relay,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7,
no. 11, pp. 4558 –4567, Nov. 2008.
[8] M. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over
GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165 –167, Jun. 1998.
[9] C. Poulliat, M. Fossorier, and D. Declercq, “Design of regular (2,dc )LDPC codes over GF(q) using their binary images,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1626 –1635, Oct. 2008.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge
University Press, Mar. 2007.
[11] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting
Codes. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1977.
[12] M. Khojastepour, N. Ahmed, and B. Aazhang, “Code design for the
relay channel and factor graph decoding,” in Thirty-Eighth Asilomar
Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers 2004, vol. 2, Nov. 2004,
pp. 2000–2004.
[13] K. Kasai, D. Declercq, C. Poulliat, and K. Sakaniwa, “Multiplicatively
repeated nonbinary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57,
no. 10, pp. 6788 –6795, Oct. 2011.
[14] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary
LDPC codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp.
633 –643, Apr. 2007.
[15] M. Davey, “Error-correction using low-density parity-check codes,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Cambridge, U.K., 1999.

Fig. 4. The performance of proposed coding strategy at R = 1/6 and R =
1/12. The solid curve corresponds to the BER performance while the FER
performance is represented by dashed curve. The word “silent” in parentheses
means S keep silent in MAC mode.

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, the simple NBLDPC coding strategy for very
noisy relay channel is presented. We have demonstrated that
this NBLDPC coding strategy is very promising to capture the

5

