Title:          ISIT2012CAM.pdf
Author:         tharakas
Creator:        PrimoPDF http://www.primopdf.com
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Mon May  7 17:56:52 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:30 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      595.28 x 841.89 pts (A4)
File size:      340874 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.7
ISIT'2012 1569559995

Optimal Selective Feedback Policies for
Opportunistic Beamforming Under Peak Feedback
Constraints
Tharaka Samarasinghe

Hazer Inaltekin

Jamie S. Evans

Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering,
University of Melbourne, Australia.
Email: ts@unimelb.edu.au

Department of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering,
Antalya International University, Turkey.
Email: hazeri@antalya.edu.tr

Department of Electrical and
Computer Systems Engineering,
Monash University, Australia.
Email: jamie.evans@monash.edu

Abstract—Opportunistic beamforming (OBF) is a well-known
communication technique that utilizes partial channel state information (CSI) to obtain multiuser diversity gains in the downlink.
We focus on the structure of the optimal homogenous threshold
feedback policy that maximizes the ergodic downlink sum-rate
for OBF under a peak feedback load constraint, which we model
by using a multi-packet reception model for the uplink. We solve
the resulting quasi-convex optimization problem by obtaining a
formula for the sum-rate maximizing feedback probability. While
providing insights on the implications of our results in practical
systems, we also illustrate the tradeoff between feedback and rate
by obtaining the Pareto optimal boundary between feasible and
infeasible feedback-rate pairs.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Opportunistic beamforming (OBF) is an adaptive signaling
technique to reduce the amount of feedback load for wireless
vector broadcast channels [1], [2]. In OBF, we opportunistically schedule randomly formed information carrying beams
among the mobile users (MUs) by taking partial CSI into
account. An important property of OBF is that it achieves
the full CSI sum-rate capacity at the downlink to a ﬁrst
order [3]. In this paper, motivated by such opportunistic
communication techniques, we focus on the downlink sumrate maximization for vector broadcast channels under peak
ﬁnite feedback constraints on the uplink.
Although OBF reduces the feedback load considerably in
comparison to having full CSI, it still requires all the MUs
to feed back in its plain implementations. This leads to an
impractical linear growth in the feedback load with the number
of MUs. There is also a signiﬁcant waste of communication
resources created by the feedback packets from the MUs
having no realistic chance of being scheduled for downlink
transmission. A potential solution alleviating this impracticality is the use of a selective feedback technique in which
only the MUs having good instantaneous channel states are
multiplexed on the uplink feedback channel [3]–[9].
The results obtained in [7], [9] are promising to obtain an
O (1) feedback load, on the average, through such a selective
feedback mechanism. In particular, they establish the structure
of selective feedback policies maximizing the vector broadcast

1

sum-rate such that the average number of MUs feeding back
is less than a given ﬁnite feedback load constraint. However,
these papers assume an ideal medium-access-control (MAC)
layer for contention resolution on the uplink feedback channel,
and do not address the likely packet collisions due to a
potentially large number of MUs attempting to send their
feedback packets back to the base-station (BS).
In this paper, we consider a multi-packet reception model to
resolve collisions from MUs. MUs with positive feedback decisions feed their channel states back to the BS simultaneously.
The BS can reconstruct all the feedback packets successfully
if and only if the random number of MUs feeding back is
less than or equal to λ, which is the maximum number of
packets that the BS can decode concurrently. The BS utilizes
information contained in the decoded feedback packets to
assign beams to MUs. We say that a collision occurs if the
random number of MUs feeding back is greater than λ. In
this case, all packets are destroyed together. We will derive
the structure of the optimal homogenous threshold feedback
policy that maximizes the ergodic downlink sum-rate under
the peak feedback load constraint λ imposed by this channel
model.
The studied model is general in a sense that λ = 1 gives
us the slotted Aloha collision model [10], and λ > 1 gives
us a special class of a multi-packet reception collision model
called T -out-of-N channels [11], [12]. Such channels can
be implemented by using T -out-of-N codes [13]. However,
unlike most such channel models, this paper does not consider
back-off and retransmission issues. Hence, a collision will lead
to zero rate. This assumption helps to eliminate the BS from
receiving expired information on the instantaneous channel
states.
Our contributions and the organization of the paper are
as follows. We explain the multiple access technique for
feedback, and formulate the optimization problem in Section
II. Then, in Section III, we show that this is a quasi-convex
optimization problem by analyzing the rate expression, and
solve it to obtain a formula for the optimal feedback probability. Our results hold for most practical fading distributions such

Mt
as Rayleigh, Ricean and Nakagami. In Section IV, we apply
these results to a Rayleigh fading channel model to provide
further insights, and discuss the implications of the derived
formulas in practical systems. We demonstrate the amount of
feedback reduction that can be achieved without any noticeable
performance degradation in rate by setting the threshold levels
optimally. We also illustrate the tradeoff between feedback
and rate by obtaining the Pareto optimal boundary between
feasible and infeasible feedback-rate pairs. Any feedback-rate
pair strictly above the boundary is an infeasible operating
point, and a pair strictly below this boundary is a feasible but
suboptimal operating point. Section V concludes the paper.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM S ETUP
A. System Model
We focus on a vector broadcast channel of a single-cell
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication system consisting of M transmitter antennas at the BS and n MUs
with single receiver antennas. The BS generates M random
orthonormal beams, and transmits M different symbols in the
direction of these beams. The signal received by the ith MU
is given by
Yi =

√
ρ

M

h ⊤ bk s k + Z i ,
i

(1)

MU n

MU 2
MU 1

FRP

.
.
.

.
.
.

FRP

FP

FP

FRP

.
.
.

···

FP
t

Fig. 1.

···

t

t

The multiple access technique for feedback.

their FPs in the kth mini-slot simultaneously. The values for τ
and t can be communicated to the MUs at system initialization.
The feedback acquisition process is pictorially represented in
Fig. 1.
It is important to note that a MU having an SINR value
above the threshold on two or more beams will end up sending
more than one FP according our deﬁnition of the feedback
policy. This can be considered as a waste of communication
resources since the MUs can piggy-back the additional data
with the ﬁrst FP. However, it has been shown and discussed
in detail in [7] that this will not happen if the threshold value
is above one (i.e., 0 [dB]), which holds for almost all practical
communication scenarios.
C. The Optimization Problem

k=1

where ρ is the transmit power per beam, Zi is the unit
power (complex) Gaussian background noise, hi is the M -by1 complex channel gain vector between the ith MU and the
BS, sk and bk are the transmitted symbol and the beamforming
vector corresponding to the kth beam, respectively. A block
fading model is assumed in the broadcast channel.
Let γm,i be the SINR value corresponding to the mth beam
⊤
at the ith MU. Let γ i = (γ1,i , . . . , γM,i ) ∈ RM represent the
+
SINR vector at MU i. Beams are statistically identical, and the
elements of γ i are identically distributed for all i ∈ N with a
common marginal distribution F , where N = {1, . . . , n}. We
will assume that F is continuous, and has the density f with
support R+ . Let M = {1, . . . , M }.
B. Multiple Access Technique for Feedback
We focus on the sum-rate maximization under peak ﬁnite
feedback constraints, where only a subset of MUs feed back
according to a predeﬁned selective feedback policy. To obtain
partial CSI from this subset, the BS ﬁrst broadcasts a feedback
request packet (FRP). On retrieval of this packet, the MUs
make a feedback decision using a homogenous threshold
feedback policy, which we deﬁne as follows.
Deﬁnition 1: We say T is a homogenous threshold feedback policy if T (γk,i ) generates a feedback packet (FP)
containing the SINR value γk,i if and only if γk,i ≥ τ for
all k ∈ M and i ∈ N . τ is the homogenous threshold value.
The BS uses the time-division-multiple-access (TDMA)
technique to mediate the process of feedback acquisition. More
precisely, M mini-slots with length t are allocated for FPs. All
MUs having a positive feedback decision on beam k transmit

2

We deﬁne the truncated SINR on beam m at MU i as
¯
γ
γm,i = γm,i 1{γm,i ≥τ } , and Γ = (¯m,i )m∈M,i∈N is the
¯
system-wide M -by-n truncated SINR matrix containing the
truncated SINR values of all MUs in the system. Given a
¯
threshold value τ , Λm Γ denotes the random number of
MUs feeding back on beam m, or alternatively, the random
¯
number of FPs transmitted in mini-slot m. We have Λm Γ =
n
1{γm,i ≥τ } , and it is our performance measure along the
i=1
feedback dimension.
The BS will decode the FPs with probability one to retrieve
the SINR information if and only if the number of FPs
transmitted in the respective mini-slot is less than the feedback
constraint λ. On the other hand, a collision will occur and
all packets will be lost with probability one if the number
of FPs exceed λ. There will be zero rate on beam m if the
BS has no SINR information regarding the respective beam.
This happens on the overﬂow event, where more than λ MUs
feed back, and also on the outage event, where no MU feeds
back. The BS selects the MU with the highest SINR on
each beam for downlink data transmission to maximize the
instantaneous communication rate. Then, the downlink ergodic
sum-rate achieved for a threshold value τ and a feedback limit
λ is given by
¯
Rλ (τ ) = E rλ τ, Γ
M

=E
m=1

log 1 + max γm,i 1{Λm (Γ)≤λ} ,(2)
¯
¯
1≤i≤n

¯
where rλ τ, Γ is the instantaneous sum-rate achieved for
a given τ and λ, and the expectation is taken over the

random truncated SINR matrices. Note that the rate on
beam m is automatically equal to zero due to truncation if
m
m
¯
¯
Λm Γ = 0. Rλ (τ ) and rλ τ, Γ denote the ergodic rate
and the instantaneous rate on beam m, respectively. Also,
the ergodic sum-rate achieved on an event A is written as
¯
Rλ (τ, A) = E rλ τ, Γ 1A . We will use Rλ (τ ) as the
performance measure along the rate dimension.
Our main optimization problem is to determine the optimal
homogenous threshold value that maximizes the downlink
sum-rate such that the number of MUs feeding back on each
beam at each channel realization is less than or equal to λ.
Since the rate achieved on the outage and overﬂow events
is zero according to (2), we can formulate this problem as
an unconstrained optimization problem. We can also view
the sum-rate as a function of the feedback probability p =
Pr {γi,m ≥ τ } without loss of generality since the probability
density function of the SINR is already assumed to have R+
as its support. Therefore, there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the threshold value τ and the feedback probability
p, i.e., τ = F −1 (1 − p). Using these justiﬁcations, the main
optimization problem to be solved can be represented as
maximize
p∈[0,1]

Rλ (p) .

λ

Rλ (p) = M
k=1

∞

To solve the optimization problem given in (3), it is enough
to focus only on the ﬁrst beam since the beams are statistically
identical and Rλ (p) can be written as
(4)

3

log (1 + x) [F (x) − (1 − p)]

Ik−1 (p) =
F −1 (1−p)

(5)

k−1

dF (x).

¯
¯
Proof: First, consider the event Ak = Γ|Λ1 Γ = k ,
which is the event where exactly k MUs feed back on beam
one. The probability of this event is pAk = n pk (1 − p)n−k .
k
Therefore, we can write
1
Rλ (p, Ak )

=

1
¯
pAk E rλ τ, Γ |Ak

=

pA k

∞

log(1 + x)dH(x),

(6)

0

where
H(x) =

III. S ELECTING T HE OPTIMAL F EEDBACK PROBABILITY

n
k(1 − p)n−k Ik−1 (p),
k

where

(3)

If λ = n, Rλ (p) strictly increases as a function of p, 0 ≤
p ≤ 1, and attains its maximum at p = 1 since the probability
of the overﬂow event is equal to zero in this case. The system
makes use of available communication resources in the best
possible way by setting the feedback probability of all MUs to
one, i.e., by minimizing the outage event probability. However,
when λ < n, Rλ (0) and Rλ (1) are both equal to zero since
the outage and overﬂow events will happen with probability
one for p = 0 and p = 1, respectively.
When p is increased from zero to one for λ < n, Rλ (p)
ﬁrstly increases with p since increasing p reduces the probability of the outage event. On the other hand, increasing p
increases the probability of the overﬂow event in this case.
Therefore, the loss created by the overﬂow event will start
to dominate the gain obtained by reducing the outage event
probability for large values of p, which eventually causes
Rλ (p) to decrease and tail off after some certain feedback
probability. Therefore, intuitively, Rλ (p) will ﬁrst increase
with p up to a certain probability, and then decrease, making
Rλ (p) quasi-concave over p for λ < n. In the next section,
we will make these intuitive quasi-concavity ideas formal,
and solve the resulting optimization problem by obtaining
an expression for the optimal feedback probability p⋆ , which
maximizes the downlink ergodic sum-rate for a given feedback
constraint λ.

Rλ (p) = M E log 1 + max γ1,i 1{Λ1 (Γ)≤λ} .
¯
¯
1≤i≤n

By using this idea, we will further evaluate the downlink sumrate through the following lemma.
Lemma 1: The ergodic sum-rate of the system in consideration is given by

F (x) − F (τ )
1 − F (τ )

k

1{x≥τ } ,

(7)

which is the cumulative distribution function of the maximum
of k independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) SINR
values given all of them are above τ . Substitution of (7) in (6)
together with F (τ ) = 1 − p gives
1
Rλ (p, Ak ) =

n
k(1 − p)n−k Ik−1 (p).
k

(8)

The rate on beam one will be non zero only on events Ak for
1 ≤ k ≤ λ. Since these are disjoint events, summing over the
average rates achieved on each of these events gives us the
ergodic rate on beam one, which completes the proof.
The proof of the quasi-concavity of rate over p requires
some more effort since the quasi-concavity deﬁnition cannot
be applied directly. Hence, we will analyze the ﬁrst derivative
of Rλ (p) as a function of p, which is formally obtained in
the following lemma.
Lemma 2: The ﬁrst derivative of the sum-rate Rλ (p) is
given by
′
Rλ (p) = M n(1 − p)n−1 log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) − gλ (p) , (9)

where
gk (p)

=

n
k(n − k)(1 − p)n−k−1 Ik−1 (p)
k

(10)

for k ∈ {1, . . . , λ}.
Proof: Using the Leibniz integral rule, we obtain an
1
expression for the ﬁrst derivative of Rλ (p, Ak ), which is
′
1
Rλ (p, Ak ) = gk−1 (p) − gk (p) for k ≥ 2, and
′

1
Rλ (p, A1 ) =

n
(1 − p)n−1 log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) − g1 (p)
1

3

G2 (p)

G1 (1)
p

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

⋆

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Feedback Probability p

Fig. 2.

A plot illustrating the behavior of G1 (p) and G2 (p).
λ

1
1
for k = 1. Since Rλ (p) =
k=1 Rλ (p, Ak ), we have
λ
′
′
1
Rλ (p) = M k=1 Rλ (p, Ak ) . Therefore,

Sum-rate (Nats per Channel Use)

G1 (p)

λ

′

′
1
Rλ (p) = M Rλ (p, A1 ) +

k=2

which completes the proof.
By manipulating the expression for the ﬁrst derivative of the
sum-rate, we will prove that the ergodic sum-rate is a quasiconcave function of p. Then, by using this behavior, we will
obtain an expression for the optimal feedback probability p⋆ ,
which is formally stated in the following theorem. We focus
only on the case where λ < n. For λ = n, p⋆ is equal to 1 as
discussed above.
Theorem 1: Let λ < n. Then, the optimal feedback probability per beam p⋆ for the system in consideration is given by
the solution to
cIλ−1 (p⋆ ) − (1 − p⋆ )λ log 1 + F −1 (1 − p⋆ ) = 0,

(11)

where c = λ n−1 .
λ
Proof: The stationary points of Rλ (p) for p ∈ (0, 1) can
be obtained from (9), and they satisfy
gλ (p)
= 0.
n(1 − p)n−1

After substituting for gλ (p) from (10), any p which satisﬁes
(1 − p)λ log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) = cIλ−1 (p)

(12)

n−1

> 0 for
will be a stationary point since M n(1 − p)
all p ∈ (0, 1). Let G1 (p) = cIλ−1 (p), and G2 (p) = (1 −
p)λ log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) . We have G1 (0) = 0, and
∞

log (1 + x) [F (x)]

λ−1

Note that G1 (1) > 0. We also have
c (λ − 1) Iλ−2 (p) if λ ≥ 2
c log 1 + F −1 (1 − p)
if λ = 1

,

(13)

which is again strictly positive for any p ∈ (0, 1). Hence,
G1 (p) is strictly increasing function of p, with end points
G1 (0) = 0 and G1 (1) > 0. Similarly, we have G2 (1) = 0
and limp→0 G2 (p) = ∞. Its ﬁrst derivative is equal to
G′ (p) = −(1−p)λ−1
2

1

0.5

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Fig. 3. A plot illustrating the behavior of Rλ (τ ) for different values of λ,
where n = 30, M = 2 and ρ = 1.

which is strictly negative for any p ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, G2 (p)
is strictly decreasing. The behavior of G1 (p) and G2 (p) is
illustrated in Fig. 2.1 Hence, G1 (p) and G2 (p) intersect at a
unique value of p, which implies that there is only one station′
ary point of Rλ (p) for p ∈ (0, 1). Since limp→0 Rλ (p) > 0,
Rλ (0) = 0 and Rλ (1) = 0, this stationary point corresponds to
′
the global maximum of Rλ (p). These arguments also indicate
that the sum-rate strictly increases up a point p⋆ , and then,
strictly decreases. Therefore, the sum-rate is a quasi-concave
function of p, which completes the proof.
It is important to note that the proven quasi-concavity
property of the sum-rate is distribution independent, and the
result in Theorem 1 can be used to ﬁnd the optimal feedback
probability for most practical fading distributions such as
Rayleigh, Ricean and Nakagami. However, substituting for
F in (11) using a particular fading distribution may not
necessarily lead to a closed form expression for p⋆ . In such
cases, most of the common root ﬁnding algorithms can be
easily used to ﬁnd the unique zero crossing since (11) is
a strictly increasing function of p. This will still be much
efﬁcient computationally, compared to doing a line search
over p on (5). In the next section, we will provide some
numerical evaluations and insights into our results using a
Rayleigh fading channel model.
IV. D ISCUSSION OF R ESULTS : R AYLEIGH FADING
C HANNELS

dF (x).

0

G′ (p) =
1

1.5

Feedback Probabiility p

= M n(1 − p)n−1 log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) − gλ (p) ,

G1 (1) = c

λ=5
λ = 10
λ = n = 30

2

0
0

(gk−1 (p) − gk (p))

M n(1 − p)n−1 log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) −

2.5

(1 − p)
(1 + F −1 (1 − p)) f (F −1 (1 − p))
+ λ log 1 + F −1 (1 − p) ,

For this numerical study, we assume transmitted signals of
unit power, and Rayleigh distributed channel fading coefﬁcients of unit power. Interested readers are referred to [3] for
further details of the physical layer model. F , f and F −1 for
this model are given in [9]. Firstly, we study the behavior of
the sum-rate for different values of λ. As shown in Fig. 3,
the sum-rate is quasi-concave over p, and is strictly increasing
when λ = n, which is in line with our arguments above. We
observe that the difference between the maximum sum-rates
for λ = 10 and λ = n is very small. This observation is more
clearly depicted in Fig. 4, where we have plotted the ratio
1 The

4

plot is just given to conceptualize the behavior of the two functions.

pair is below this boundary, then it is a feasible operating
point, which means that the sum-rate can be achieved without
violating the feedback constraint. However, a point strictly
below the boundary is suboptimal in the sense that the same
sum-rate can be achieved with strictly less feedback or a better
sum-rate can be achieved while maintaining the same feedback
level.

1

Rλ (p⋆ )
Rn (1)

0.8

n = 30
n = 50
n = 80

0.6

0.4

V. C ONCLUSIONS

0.2

0
0

2

4

6
8
10
Feedback Limit λ

12

14 15

Fig. 4. A plot illustrating the tradeoff between sum-rate and feedback for
different values of n, where M = 2 and ρ = 1.

of sum-rates achieved with (Rλ (p⋆ )) and without (Rn (1))
thresholding as a function of λ. The plot, in fact, represents the
feedback-rate tradeoff for opportunistic beamforming under
peak feedback load constraints for different MU levels, and
also represents the amount of feedback reduction that can be
achieved by setting the threshold levels according to Theorem
1 without any noticeable performance degradation in rate.
The outage and overﬂow event probabilities are strictly
positive when thresholds are optimally set to meet the feedback
constraint λ, λ < n, which causes a rate loss. However, on
inspecting Fig. 4, we see that there is almost no rate loss if λ is
greater than 12, irrespective of the user level. This observation
can be explained as follows. The BS communicates with only
the best MU on each beam. Therefore, a perfect feedback
policy in terms of optimal usage of the uplink capacity is
a policy which allows only the best MU on each beam to
feed back. However, since there is no coordination among the
MUs, this is impossible to achieve in a distributed manner,
and setting λ = 1 results in a large degradation in sum-rate as
shown in the ﬁgure, mainly because such a small constraint
on the feedback load increases the probability of the outage
and overﬂow events. Therefore, the feedback constraint should
be relaxed (or, the multipacket reception capability should be
improved) in a way which ensures the best MU feeds back
without causing an overﬂow event. The tails of the distribution
of the random number of MUs requesting each beam decays
to zero exponentially fast. This means that there is a high
probability of the best MU feeding back without causing an
overﬂow when λ is above a certain value, which is 12 in this
case. Increasing n increases the probability of the overﬂow
event. This results in the downwards shift of the curves in
Fig. 4 when n is increased, although it is negligibly small.
Some further comments on Fig. 4 are in order. The curves in
this ﬁgure represent the Pareto optimal boundary between feasible and infeasible feedback-rate pairs, which can be achieved
by setting a threshold level in accordance with Theorem 1.
Any feedback-rate pair above the boundary is an infeasible
operating point, which means that the represented sum-rate
cannot be achieved subject to the feedback restriction. If a

5

In this paper, we considered a multi-packet reception model
on the uplink, where the BS can successfully decode the
feedback packets if and only if the number of feedback packets
received is less than a constraint λ. Using this model, we
obtained a formula for the downlink sum-rate maximizing
feedback probability for any given λ. We discussed the importance of our result using a Rayleigh fading channel model,
and obtained the Pareto optimal boundary between feasible
and infeasible feedback-rate pairs. A possible modiﬁcation of
the problem set-up presented in this paper can be achieved
by eliminating the TDMA process among the beams in the
feedback phase. In this model, the feedback resource is shared
between beams: we would have a single time slot with
increased peak feedback capacity. The performance of this
shared feedback model is currently under investigation.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Viswanath, D. Tse, and R. Laroia, “Opportunistic beamforming using
dumb antennas,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1277–1294, June
2002.
[2] D. Love, R. Heath, V. Lau, D. Gesbert, and B. R. M. Andrews, “An
overview of limited feedback in wireless communication systems,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, pp. 1341–1365, Oct 2008.
[3] M. Shariff and B. Hassibi, “On the capacity of MIMO broadcast
channels with partial side information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51,
pp. 506–522, Feb 2005.
[4] D. Gesbert and M. Alouini, “How much feedback is multi-user diversity
really worth?,” in Proc. International Conference on Communications,
pp. 234–238, Paris, France, June 2004.
[5] J. Diaz, O. Simeone, and Y. Bar-Ness, “Asymptotic analysis of reducedfeedback strategies for MIMO Gaussian broadcast channels,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, pp. 1308–1316, Mar 2008.
[6] H. Inaltekin, T. Samarasinghe, and J. Evans, “Rate optimal limited
feedback policies for the MIMO downlink,” in Proc. International
Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and
Wireless Networks, Princeton, USA, May 2011.
[7] T. Samarasinghe, H. Inaltekin, and J. Evans, “The feedback-capacity
tradeoff for opportunistic beamforming,” in Proc. International Conference on Communications, Kyoto, Japan, June 2011.
[8] T. Samarasinghe, H. Inaltekin, and J. Evans, “Vector broadcast channels:
Optimality of threshold feedback policies,” in Proc. IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Aug 2011.
[9] T. Samarasinghe, H. Inaltekin, and J. Evans, “Vector broadcast channels:
Optimal threshold selection problem,” in Proc. IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Aug 2011.
[10] L. Roberts, “ALOHA packet system with and without slots and capture,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 5, pp. 28–42,
Apr 1975.
[11] S. Ghez, S.Verdu, and S. Schwartz, “Stability properties of slotted
aloha with multipacket reception capability,” IEEE Trans. Auto. Control,
vol. 33, pp. 640–649, July 1988.
[12] N. Mahravari, “Random-access communication with multiple reception,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 36, pp. 614–622, May 1990.
[13] P. Mathys, “A class of codes for a t active users out of n multiple-access
communication system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 36, pp. 1206–
1219, Nov 1990.

