Creator:         TeX output 2012.05.10:1248
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Thu May 10 12:48:26 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:03 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      292703 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569566003

Expander Graph Based Overlapped Chunked Codes
Bin Tang† , Shenghao Yang‡ , Yitong Yin† , Baoliu Ye† , and Sanglu Lu†
† National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
‡ ITCS, Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
Email: tb@dislab.nju.edu.cn, shyang@tsinghua.edu.cn, {yinyt, yebl, sanglu}@nju.edu.cn

chunk [5]. One issue in applying chunked codes is scheduling,
i.e., when a transmission chance is available, which chunk
should be chosen for generating a coded packet. One scheme
is sequential scheduling, in which the sender keeps on transmitting packets generated using a chunk, and when receiving
positive feedback(s) from receiver(s), it starts the transmission
of the next chunk. While some efﬁcient feedback protocols
for speciﬁc applications have been developed [11], [7], in
general, such feedbacks incur a non-negligible delay and
may consume network resources such as bandwidth, resulting
in degraded system performance. An alternative approach
without feedbacks is random scheduling, where the chunk for
generating a coded packet is always randomly picked. Random
scheduling is also known to be resilient to any channel erasure
patterns.
In the context of random scheduling, Maymounkov et al.
[8] showed that chunked codes with disjoint chunks, referred
to as non-overlapped chunked (NOC) codes, can achieve the
capacity if the chunk size is on or higher than the logarithm
order of the ﬁle length. However, in most real applications,
the chunk size is required to be a small constant due to the
computational constraints of network devices. In this case, it
remains unknown which rates (to be formally deﬁned) can
be achieved by NOC codes. On the other hand, two research
groups have independently shown by simulations that better
performance could be achieved for practical chunk sizes by
allowing different chunks to share same packets [9], [10],
referred to as overlapped chunked codes. Although several
overlapped chunking schemes have been proposed in the
literature [9], [10], [11], the analyzes of them are somewhat
heuristic [10], [11], or assume variable chunk sizes [12], [12].
In this paper we address the analysis and design of chunked
codes with constant chunk sizes under the strategy of random
scheduling. By noting that the random scheduling strategy
requires a large number of coded packets for decoding the
last chunks, we prove that for any chunked code with a
ﬁxed constant chunk size, if applied directly, the rate vanishes
inevitably as the ﬁle length goes to inﬁnity. Thus, precode,
which allows only a fraction of packets to be decoded, plays
a vital role to achieve a positive rate. We then present a tight
analysis for the NOC codes with precoding, which can help us
choose appropriate precodes such that the rates are maximized.
It is observed that the maximum rates achieved by NOC codes
are far away from 1 (e.g., in a moderate setting with a chunk
size of 32 and a ﬁnite ﬁeld size of 16, the maximum rate of

Abstract—Chunked codes are a variation of random linear
network codes with low computational complexities. In chunked
codes, the packets in a ﬁle are grouped into small (non-overlapped
or overlapped) chunks, and random linear encoding operations
are performed within each chunk. Previous studies show that
when the chunk size is lower bounded by some increasing
function of the ﬁle length, chunked codes asymptotically achieve
the min-cut capacity. However, in most real applications, the
chunk size is required to be a small constant due to the
computational constraints of network devices. In this case, it
remains unknown which rates can be achieved by chunked codes.
In this paper, we address the analysis and design of chunked
codes with ﬁxed constant chunk sizes. We ﬁrst highlight the
importance of precoding for chunked codes to achieve constant
rates, and then present an analysis of non-overlapped chunked
(NOC) codes with precoding. We further introduce a new class of
chunked codes, called EOC codes, which are based on expander
graphs to form overlapped chunks. Numerical and simulation
results show that EOC codes achieve signiﬁcantly higher rates
than NOC codes, and also outperform other state-of-the-art
overlapped chunked codes.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Random linear network coding (RLNC) [1], [2] has become
a simple but powerful tool for data dissemination over communication networks. In RLNC, participating nodes generate
coded packets by linear combinations of all the packets
received so far with coefﬁcients randomly chosen from a ﬁnite
ﬁeld and forward the coded packets. Due to its random nature,
RLNC can be easily implemented in a distributed fashion. It
is also capacity-achieving for networks with packet loss in a
wide range of scenarios [3], [4].
A major issue in applying RLNC is its high computational
complexities. Consider the transmission of a ﬁle with K
packets. For encoding, RLNC requires O(K) operations to
generate a coded packet. And for decoding, it has to invert
a K × K dense matrix and use the inverse to recover the
whole ﬁle. Usually, the time for decoding is dominated by
the ﬁle recovery process, which costs O(K) operations for
each original packet. When the ﬁle is very large, the cost of
both encoding and decoding operations becomes prohibitive,
making RLNC hardly to be implemented in real systems.
As a variation of RLNCs, chunked codes incur lower
computational complexities by grouping the packets of a ﬁle
into multiple small chunks (a.k.a. generations, classes, etc.),
and performing random linear encoding operations within each
‡ Part of the work was done when S. Yang was with the Institute of Network
Coding, The Chinese University of Hong Kong.

1

code with chunk size M as

an NOC code is only about 73%).
Towards the improvement of rates, we propose a novel
expander graph based overlapped chunking (EOC) scheme,
which uses only a small number of overlaps such that the
number of chunks is increased slightly, and simultaneously
guarantees that whenever any subset of chunks is decoded,
it can provide substantial help for decoding the remaining
chunks. We also establish a lower bound for the maximum rate
of an EOC code with appropriate parameter and precoding,
which reveals that EOC codes can achieve signiﬁcantly higher
rates than NOC codes (e.g., in the same setting as mentioned
earlier, the maximum rate of an EOC code is at least 93%).
Also, simulation results show that EOC outperforms other
state-of-the-art overlapped chunking schemes.

K
.
K→∞ N

R(M ) = lim

(1)

With some abuse of notation, we also refer to K/N as its rate.
Since the rate of any chunked code is upper bounded by 1,
our main objective is to design efﬁcient chunked codes with
rates close to 1.
III. P RECODES
As mentioned earlier, for chunked codes, the random
scheduling strategy will incur a long tail of the “coupon
collector’s curve”, i.e., a large number of packets have to be
collected for decoding the last chunks, which reminds us not to
apply chunked codes directly. Formally, we have the following
result.
Theorem 3.1: For any chunked code with a constant chunk
size, if applied directly, then its rate decays at a rate of
1
Ω( log K ) as the ﬁle length K grows.
The proof of the above result is similar to the one in [14]
for a result for LT codes, and is thus omitted to save the space.
Example 3.2: Consider an NOC code with n chunks, each
with size M . To decode the ﬁle completely, the destination has
to collect M packets of each chunk.1 It is shown in [15] that,
when K → ∞, N = n log n + (M − 1)n log log n + O(n).
K
1
Noting n = M , K = Θ( log K ) vanishes.
N
The idea to achieve a positive constant rate is to apply
precoding before using chunked codes for transmission: the
source ﬁrst encodes the original K packets into K ′ > K
precoded packets using some precoding scheme, and then
transmits these precoded packets using a chunked code. In
this case, only a fraction of precoded packets is required to
be decoded at the destination so that the whole ﬁle can be
recovered, thus avoiding the long tail, and achieving a nonvanishing rate.
We make the following assumption about precoding: for any
0 < η < 1 and ε > 0, there exists some precode PC(η), which
encodes K original packets into K ′ = K/η precoded packets
such that all K original packets can be recovered reliably from
any (1+ε)ηK ′ = (1+ε)K precoded packets. The assumption
holds for various codes, including Tornado codes [16], rightregular codes [17], etc.

II. P RELIMINARIES
We formally describe the model of chunked codes. Consider
the distribution of a ﬁle with K packets, P1 , P2 , . . . , PK ,
each of which is composed by a number of symbols from
a ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq . The packets are grouped into n chunks,
C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn , where each chunk is a set of M packets.
Throughout the paper we assume that M is a ﬁxed constant
which is independent of K. We call a coding scheme nonoverlapping if all chunks are disjoint, i.e., Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ for all
i ̸= j, and overlapping if otherwise.
Similar to [11], we assume that the ﬁle is distributed
over a unicast link modeled by an erasure channel using a
chunked code under the strategy of random scheduling. In
each transmission, the source: (1) selects a chunk uniformly
at random, say Cj , from the n chunks; (2) randomly combines
∑
packets in Cj into a new packet Pnew =
i ci Pji , where
Pji ’s are packets in Cj , and c = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cM ) is a random
vector whose entries are picked uniformly and independently
from Fq ; (3) sends the newly generated packet Pnew to the
destination over the communication link. The transmission of
the source is rateless, i.e., the source does not stop transmitting
until the whole ﬁle has been decoded by the destination.
Once the destination has collected M coded packets with
linearly independent encoding vectors for some chunk, all
packets in the chunk can be decoded by the Gauss elimination.
The process is completed when all chunks have been decoded.
Furthermore, if the chunks are allowed to be overlapped,
some packets may appear in more than one chunks, thus a
successfully decoded chunk may help decoding other chunks.
This leads to an iterative decoding process: whenever a chunk
is successfully decoded, the linear system is updated accordingly so that the decoded packets are substituted back helping
decode other chunks.
Since each transmitted coded packet is erased randomly
and independently, all the received packets are statistically
the same. Thus, we can deﬁne N as the minimum number
of coded packets to be collected such that the whole ﬁle can
be reliably decoded, i.e., the ﬁle fails to be recovered with
probability at most inverse polynomial in K, and evaluate the
efﬁciency of a chunked code by the ratio between K and N .
Formally, we deﬁne the (normalized) rate R(M ) of a chunked

IV. A NALYSIS FOR N ON - OVERLAPPED C HUNKED C ODES
j
Let ζM be the probability that an M × j matrix with entries
uniformly chosen from Fq at random has rank M . We have
(see a derivation in [18])
{∏M −1
1
j
l=0 (1 − q j−l ) j ≥ M
ζM =
0
j < M.
j
According to the random linear coding scheme, ζM is just the
probability that a chunk is decodable when j coded packets
of this chunk are collected.
1 To make the illustration simple, here q is assumed to be sufﬁciently large,
such that the encoding vectors of any collected packets of a chunk are linearly
independent.

2

∑∞
−x j j
Let p(x) = j=M e j!x ζM .
The following result establishes the relationship between
the number of decodable original packets and the number of
received coded packets when an NOC code without precoding
is applied.
Lemma 4.1: Consider the transmission of K packets using
a precode-free NOC code with chunk size M . Let η be the
fraction of decodable original packets when receiving N coded
packets, and µ = N M be the average number of received
K
packets of each chunk. Then for any 0 < ε < 1, the event
(1 − ε)p(µ) < η < (1 + ε)p(µ)

nodes, where V = {1, 2, . . . , n}. A random regular graph
is an expander graph with high probability.
2) First associate each edge e ∈ E with a distinct original
packet, denoted by Pe , and then assign the rest original
packets evenly over the nodes. Denote the set of packets
assigned to node v as PS v .
3) Chunk Cj , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, consists of packets in PS j and
packets associated with edges incident to j, i.e.,
Cj = PS j ∪ {Pe : e is incident to node j}.
Due to the one-to-one correspondence between chunks and
nodes, we use the names interchangeably in this section.
From the above description, it is straightforward to see that
every chunk overlaps with d chunks, each on a distinct packet.
Therefore, when decoding, a chunk can enjoy different help
from different decoded neighboring chunks.

(2)

fails to hold with probability exponentially small in K.
Proof: (Sketch) We employ the technique of Poisson
approximation [19]. First, approximate the number of received
packets of each chunk by i.i.d. Poisson distribution with
mean value µ. Then it is easy to see that p(µ) gives the
probability that a chunk can be decoded, thus the expected
fraction of decodable chunks. By Chernoff bounds, the fraction
of decodable chunks in the Poisson approximation is tightly
concentrated around p(µ). By applying the same argument as
in [19], this implies the tight concentration in the real case,
where the number of received packets of each chunk follows
a Binomial distribution with mean value µ. Therefore, η is
sharply concentrated around p(µ).
According to the above result, one can choose an appropriate precode for NOC codes such that the number of coded
packets required for decoding the whole ﬁle is minimized, and
thus the rate is maximized.
Theorem 4.2: Let µ∗ = arg maxµ>0 p(µ) and η ∗ = p(µ∗ ).
µ
Then by precoding with PC(η ∗ ), an NOC code can achieve its
maximum rate Rmax (M ), which satisﬁes

B. Analysis
To state the main theorem of this section, we need to
introduce some notations. For any x > 0, we deﬁne a function
fx (y) as
d−1
∞
∑ e−x xj j
∑ (d − 1)
fx (y) =
y w (1−y)d−1−w
ζ
. (4)
w
j! M −w
w=0
j=0
With this function and its functional powers, we introduce
l
2
a sequence as fx (0), fx (0), . . . , fx (0), where l is an integer,
i+1
i
and fx (0) = fx (fx (0)) for all i ≥ 0. It can be veriﬁed that
the sequence is strictly increasing and is upper bounded by
1. Therefore, the sequence converges to a limit, denoted by
∗
∗
l
fx (0), when l goes to inﬁnity, i.e., fx (0) = liml→∞ fx (0).
We further deﬁne a function g(d, x) as
√
√
∗
∗
(M − d − 1)fx (0) − ( d − d − 1)(fx (0))2
2
g(d, x) =
.
x
The following theorem provides a lower bound on the
maximum rate of an EOC code with precoding.
Theorem 5.1: Let (d∗ , µ∗ ) = arg max3≤d≤M,µ>0 g(d, µ)
∗
,µ∗ ∗
and η ∗ = g(d −d∗ )µ . Then by precoding with PC(η ∗ ), an EOC
M
/2
code with degree d∗ can achieve a rate of at least g(d∗ , µ∗ )−ε,
where ε > 0 is an arbitrarily small constant.
According to Theorem 5.1, it can be shown that EOC codes
achieve higher rates than NOC codes for different chunk sizes.
For example, when M = 32 and q = 16, an EOC code can
achieve a rate of at least 93%, while the rate of an optimal
NOC code is only about 73%.
Now we proceed to prove Theorem 5.1.
Deﬁnition 5.2: The l-neighborhood of a node v, denoted
by Gl (v), is deﬁned as the subgraph of G induced by v and
all its neighbors within distance l. We say that v is l-decodable
if Gl (v) is a tree and v can be decoded when the decoding
process is restricted within the tree.
In the rest of the section, we set l = 1 logd−1 n.
3
We ﬁrst derive the probability that a node v is l-decodable
in the case that the number of received packets of each chunk
follows an i.i.d. Poisson distribution.

p(µ∗ )
p(µ∗ )
M − ε ≤ Rmax (M ) ≤
M + ε.
(3)
∗
µ
µ∗
for any arbitrarily small constant ε > 0.
As the theorem implies, NOC codes with precoding can
achieve positive rates. However, such rates are a bit low. For
example, when M = 32 and q = 16, the rate is only about
73%. In the next section, we propose an expander graph based
overlapped chunking scheme, which can improve the rates of
chunked codes signiﬁcantly.
V. E XPANDER G RAPH BASED OVERLAPPED C HUNKED
C ODES
A. Scheme Description
An expander graph based overlapped chunked (EOC) code
with K original packets, chunk size M and a parameter d
can be constructed as followings. Here d is an integer with
3 ≤ d ≤ M . Let n = MK d . To keep the analysis simple, we
−2
assume that n is an integer and dn is even.
1) Generate a random d-regular graph2 G = (V, E) with n
2 A random d-regular graph can be generated using different models. In
this paper, we adopt the uniform model, i.e., the d-regular graph is uniformly
chosen from all d-regular graphs with node set {1, 2, . . . , n}. However, one
can obtain the same result for many other models (e.g., permutation model,
perfect matching model [20]) by conducting a similar analysis.

3

Lemma 5.3: Assume that the number of received packets
of each chunk follows an i.i.d. Poisson distribution with mean
value µ. Then for any node v and ε > 0, the probability that v
∗
is l-decodable is at least (1 − ε)fµ (0) for all sufﬁciently large
n.
Proof: For a random d-regular graph G with n nodes, let
τ (n) be the number of nodes whose l-neighborhood is a tree.
Due to [21], for any ε > 0, we have that
2
1 ( (d − 1)4l )
1
Pr(τ (n) < (1 − ε)n) ≤ 2 O
= 2 O(n− 3 ).
2
ε
n
ε
So, for sufﬁciently large n, it can be shown that

number of l-decodable chunks is tightly concentrated around
∗
its expectation, which is at least (1 − ε)fµ (0)n according to
Lemma 5.3. This property holds in the actual Binomial case,
which can be shown by applying the argument in [19] to
remove the Poisson assumption.
Since each packet can appear in at most two chunks, the
above result can provide a lower bound for the number of
decodable packets. However, such bound is a bit loose. In the
following, we provide a much tighter analysis based on some
expander arguments.
Consider a d-regular graph G with n nodes. Let An×n be its
adjacency matrix, where A(u, v) is the number of edges in G
between nodes u and v. Clearly, A has n real eigenvalues λ1 ≥
λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λn . Also, λ1 = d, and for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, |λi | ≤ d.
Denote that λmax = max{|λ2 |, |λn |}. The following theorem
lists some known results about expansion and spectrum of
random regular graphs.
Lemma 5.5: Let G be a random d-regular graph on n
nodes.
• ([22]) For any subset S of δn nodes, the number of edges
(
)
between nodes in S is at most dn δ 2 + λmax δ(1 − δ) .
2
d
√
2
• ([23]) λmax ≥ 2 d − 1 · (1 − O(1/ log n)).
• ([24]) For any ε > 0, there exists some constant c > 0,
√
such that Pr[λmax ≤ 2 d − 1 + ε] = 1 − O(n−c ).
Now we are ready to prove Theorem 5.1.
Proof of Theorem 5.1: Let µ be the average number
of received packets of each chunk, and η be the fraction of
∗
decodable chunks. According to Lemma 5.4, η ≥ (1−ε)fµ (0)
for any ε > 0 with high probability. So, according to
Lemma 5.5, the number of l-decodable packets is at least
)
dn ( 2 λmax
ηnM −
η +
η(1 − η)
2
d
√
d √
≥((M − d − 1)η − ( − d − 1)η 2 )n
2
√
d √
∗
∗
≥((M − d − 1)fµ (0) − ( − d − 1)(fµ (0))2 − ε)n
2
=(g(d, µ) − ε)n.

E[τ (n)]
≥ 1 − ε.
(5)
n
Now assume that Gl (v) is a tree rooted at v. After deleting a
subtree rooted at a child of v, we obtain a (d − 1)-ary tree. We
abuse the notation and denote the resulting tree also by Gl (v).
Number the level of root by l and level of leaves by 0. Deﬁne
pi (µ) as the probability that a node at level i is decodable
when the decoding process is restricted within the subtree of
Gl (v) rooted at the node. In the following, we calculate pi (µ)
in a bottom-up fashion.
For any leaf, it cannot get any help from other chunk. So,
Pr(Gl (v) is a tree) =

p0 (µ) =

∞
∑ e−µ µj
j=0

j!

j
ζM = fµ (0).

For an internal node at level i > 0, assume that its w children
have been decoded. Thus, each received packet of this node
can be seen as a random linear combination of all packets
of this node except for the w overlapping packets. Therefore,
when j packets are collected for this node, the node can be
j
decoded with probability ζM −w . By the deﬁnition of function
fµ (·), it can be veriﬁed that
i
pi (µ) = fµ (pi−1 (µ)) = fµ (0).
∗
l
Noting that fµ (0) = liml→∞ fµ (0), we have
∗
pl (µ) > (1 − ε)fµ (0)

(6)

This provides a lower bound for the number of decodable
packets, which implies that the fraction of decodable packets
g(d,µ)
is at least (g(d,µ)−ε)n ≥ M −d/2 − ε. Now it is straightforward
K
to show the theorem.

for any ε > 0 when n is sufﬁciently large.
Combining (5) and (6), the lemma follows.
The following lemma gives the number of l-decodable
chunks when receiving a number of coded packets.
Lemma 5.4: Let µ be the average number of received coded
packets of each chunk in the actual case. Then for any ε > 0,
the probability that the number of l-decodable chunks is less
∗
than (1 − ε)fµ (0)n is exponentially small in n.
Proof: (Sketch) The proof is by combining the Poisson approximation with Martingale concentration, where the
later beneﬁts from the locality of l-decoding process. In the
Poisson case, consider a standard vertex exposure martingale
on the random regular graph G. Note that the exposure on
one node can affect the number of l-decodable nodes by at
most the number of nodes in its l-neighborhood, which is
1
on the order of n 3 . Therefore, we can apply the AzumaHoeffding Inequality [19] to show that in the Poisson case, the

VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
We evaluate the performance of our EOC scheme, and
compare it with the NOC scheme, the head-to-toe overlapped
chunking (H2T) scheme [9], and the random annex coding
(RAC) scheme [6].
In Fig. 1, we evaluate numerically the achievable rates of
both NOC codes and EOC codes provided in Theorem 4.2 and
Theorem 5.1, respectively. We see that EOC codes achieve
signiﬁcantly higher rates than NOC codes with the same
parameters. In particular, when the chunk size is 128, and
the size of ﬁnite ﬁeld is 16, an EOC code can achieve a rate
of at least 0.96.

4

We also conduct simulations to compare EOC with NOC,
H2T and RAC. Without precode, the relationships between
the number of received packets and the fraction of decodable
packets for all mentioned schemes are plotted in Fig. 2. In all
simulations, the chunk size is 32 and the ﬁnite ﬁeld size q is set
to be inﬁnity to see the extreme performance. (The results in
the ﬁgure can be well approximated by using sufﬁciently large
ﬁnite ﬁelds, e.g., q = 28 .) Since it is not easy to get the optimal
chunk numbers in EOC, H2T and RAC analytically, for each
scheme we perform the simulation for all the valid chunk
numbers and choose the one such that the number of received
coded packets for decoding the whole ﬁle is minimized. The
results of EOC⋆ are obtained by using EOC with degree d
optimized for using precode (see Theorem 5.1).

codes of ﬁnite lengths and in more generalized network
models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Raymond W. Yeung for many
useful discussions. This work is partially supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61170069,
61073028, 61021062 and 60903025; the National Basic Research
Program of China under Grant No. 2009CB320705, 2011CBA00300
and 2011CBA00302; the Key Technology Research and Development
Program of Jiangsu Province under Grant No. BE2010179; the University Grants Committee of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, China under Project No. AoE/E-02/08.

R EFERENCES
e
[1] T. Ho, R. Koetter, M. M´ dard, D. R. Karger, and M. Effros, “The beneﬁts
of coding over routing in a randomized setting,” in Proc. ISIT, 2003.
[2] T. Ho, M. M´ dard, R. Koetter, D. R. Karger, M. Effros, J. Shi, and
e
B. Leong, “A random linear network coding approach to multicast,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, 52(10), pp. 4413–4430, 2006.
[3] Y. Wu, “A trellis connectivity analysis of random linear network coding
with buffering,” in Proc. ISIT, 2006.
[4] D. S. Lun, M. M´ dard, R. Koetter, and M. Effros, “On coding for reliable
e
communication over packet networks,” Physical Communication, 1(1), pp.
3–20, 2008.
[5] P. A. Chou, Y. Wu, and K. Jain, “Practical network coding,” in Proc.
Allerton Conf. Comm., Control, and Computing, 2003.
[6] Y. Lin, B. Li, and B. Liang, “CodeOR: opportunistic routing in wireless
mesh networks with segmented network coding,” in Proc. ICNP, 2008.
[7] D. Koutsonikolas, C.-C. Wang, and Y. C. Hu, “Efﬁcient network-codingbased opportunistic routing through cumulative coded acknowledgments,
” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 19(5), pp. 1368–1381, 2011.
[8] P. Maymounkov, N.J.A. Harvey, and D.S. Lun, “Methods for efﬁcient
network coding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Comm., Control, and Computing,
2006.
[9] A. Heidarzadeh and A.H. Banihashemi, “Overlapped chunked network
coding,” in Proc. ITW, 2010.
[10] D. Silva, W. Zeng, and F.R. Kschischang, “Sparse network coding with
overlapping classes, ”in Proc. NetCod, 2009.
c
[11] Y. Li, E. Soljanin, and P. Spasojevi´ , “Effects of the generation size
and overlap on throughput and complexity in randomized linear network
coding, ” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 57(2), pp. 1111–1123, 2011.
[12] A. Heidarzadeh and A.H. Banihashemi, “Analysis of overlapped chunked codes with small chunks over line networks,” in Proc. ISIT, 2011.
[13] A. Heidarzadeh and A.H. Banihashemi, “Network codes with overlapping chunks over line networks: a case for linear-time codes,” 2011.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1105.5736
[14] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 52(6), pp.
2551–2567, 2006.
[15] L. Flatto, “Limit theorems for some random variables associated with
urn models,” Ann. Probabil., 10(4), pp. 927–934, 1982.
[16] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efﬁcient
erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 47(2), pp. 569–
584, 2001.
[17] P. Oswald, and A.Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the
erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 48(12), pp. 3017–3028,
2002.
[18] S. Yang, S.-W. Ho, J. Meng, E. Yang, and R. W. Yeung, “On
linear operator channels over ﬁnite ﬁelds,” 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1002.2293
[19] M. Mitzenmacher, and E. Upfal, “Probablity and computing: randomized
algorithms and probabilistic analysis,” Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[20] N. C. Wormald, “Models of random regular graphs,” Surverys in
Combinatorics, pp. 239-298, 1999.
[21] I. Dumitriu, and S. Pal, “Sparse regular random graphs: spectral density
and eigenvalues,” Preprint, 2011.
[22] N. Alon, and F. R. K. Chung, “Explicit construction of linear sized
tolerant networks,” Discrete Mathemat., 72, pp. 15–19, 1988.
[23] A. Nilli, “On the second eigenvalue of a graph,” Discrete Mathemat.,
91(2), pp. 207–210, 1991.
[24] J. Friedman, “A proof of Alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture,” in Proc.
STOC, 2003.

1

Maximum Rate

0.9
0.8
NOC(q= 2)
NOC(q= 4)
NOC(q= 8)
NOC(q=16)
EOC(q= 2)
EOC(q= 4)
EOC(q= 8)
EOC(q=16)

0.7
0.6
0.5
8

16

32
Chunk Size

64

128

Fig. 1.
Comparison of rates achieved by NOC and EOC codes with
precoding.

Fraction of Decodable Packets

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

NOC
H2T
RAC
EOC
EOC*

0.2
0.1
0
6000

8000

10000
12000
14000
Number of Received Coded Packets

16000

Fig. 2. Comparison between NOC, H2T, RAC, and EOC in terms of the
number of received coded packets for decoding a ﬁle with 10000 packets. For
each scheme, the values in the ﬁgure are the average of 100 transmissions.

We observe that both RAC and EOC show an avalanche of
decoding after certain number of packets have been received.
EOC⋆ is the most efﬁcient scheme for recovering a large
fraction (e.g., 95%) of the original packets, but it incurs a
longer tail than EOC for decoding the whole ﬁle.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we studied the performance of chunked codes
with constant chunk sizes. We highlighted the importance of
precoding, and presented a tight analysis for NOC codes.
We proposed and analyzed a novel expander graph based
overlapped chunking scheme EOC, which outperforms NOC
and all state-of-the-art overlapped chunking schemes. In the
future, we would like to analyze the performance of EOC

5

