Creator:        TeX
Producer:       Appligent StampPDF Batch, version 5.1
CreationDate:   Tue May 15 17:37:06 2012
ModDate:        Tue Jun 19 12:56:40 2012
Tagged:         no
Pages:          5
Encrypted:      no
Page size:      612 x 792 pts (letter)
File size:      585515 bytes
Optimized:      no
PDF version:    1.6
ISIT'2012 1569564605

On the Girth of Quasi Cyclic Protograph LDPC
Codes
Mehdi Karimi, and Amir H. Banihashemi
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
In [9] and [10], the work of [12] was extended by deﬁning
abelian-inevitable cycles, and a new proof was provided for the
upper bound of 12 on the girth of conventional QC LDPC codes.
In [11], the girth of conventional QC LDPC codes for the special
case that the base graph is a (fully-connected) 3 × 5 graph and the
lifting degree is a prime number of the form 15m+1 was studied.
In the literature listed above, except [6] and [11], only the
structure of the subgraphs of the base graph whose inverse
image is inevitably a cycle in the lifted graph was studied. Such
subgraphs were generally studied in isolation. In addition, in the
literature, a great deal has been devoted to ﬁnding LDPC codes
with girths equal to or larger than 12. Such codes generally have
very sparse graphs and very large block lengths (corresponding
to very large lifting degrees and/or low rates). This is while,
the girth of practical LDPC codes (of medium to high rate with
short to medium block length) is usually less than 12.
In this paper, we study the relationship between the short
cycles of a lifted graph, on one hand, and the size of the base
graph and the lifting degree, on the other hand. For this, we
closely examine the relationships among the subgraphs of the
base graph whose inverse images in the lifted graph are short
cycles. This is unlike the approach generally adopted in the
existing literature [15], [12], [9], [10], where such subgraphs
are studied in isolation. As a result of this study, we derive
an upper bound on the girth of a QC protograph code. Unlike
the other bounds which are only based on the inevitable cycles,
the proposed upper bound is based on the dependency of the
circular permutation shifts of short cycles in the base graph.
Comparing with the available bounds on the girth of QC
protograph codes, the proposed upper bound is tighter for many
cases. As an example, we show that for the TSF (155, 64) code
[17], which is constructed by lifting a 3 × 5 fully connected
base graph with a lifting degree 31, the largest possible girth
is 8, regardless of the permutations used. This is while the
upper bound provided by the other works, including [6], for
the girth of this code is 12. It should be mentioned that for
the case of a fully connected base graph and a girth 6 or
8, our method generally results in the same bounds as those
of [6]. However, there are two main differences between our
work and that of [6]. First, the bounds in [6] are only for the
protograph codes with a fully connected base graph. This is
while our method can be easily used for a protograph code
with a not-fully-connected regular or irregular base graph as
well. In fact, the only condition we assume for the base graph
is not to have any parallel edges. It is worth noting that this
assumption covers all the protograph LDPC codes currently
adopted in standards. Second, we provide bounds for the case
where the girth of the lifted graph is equal to 10. This case is not

Abstract—In this paper, we study the relationships between the
girth of the Tanner graph of a quasi cyclic (QC) protograph lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) code, on one hand, and the lifting
degree and the size and the structure of the base graph, on the
other hand. As a result, for a given base graph and a given lifting
degree, we derive an upper bound on the girth of the resulting
lifted graphs (codes). The upper bounds derived here are generally
tighter than the existing bounds. The results presented in this work
can be used to select an appropriate lifting degree for a given
base graph, in order to have a desired girth, or to provide some
insight in designing good base graphs, or to properly select the
base graph’s edge permutations.

I. INTRODUCTION
One of the well-known classes of structured low-density
parity-check (LDPC) codes is protograph LDPC codes. Protograph LDPC codes are constructed by lifting a smaller Tanner
graph, called the base graph. The resultant graph after lifting is
called a lifted graph. In the case of using circulant permutations
in the lifting process, the resultant code is called quasi cyclic
(QC). QC protograph codes are attractive for their simple
implementation. A special case of protograph construction, is
the case where the base graph is a fully connected bipartite
graph. We refer to the protograph codes constructed by applying
circulant permutations to the edges of such a base graph as
conventional QC LDPC codes. Clearly, these codes are regular.
Two examples of conventional QC LDPC codes are TannerSridhara-Fuja (TSF) codes [17] and array-based LDPC codes [5].
The girth of the Tanner graph of an LDPC code has long been
identiﬁed as an important parameter to measure the iterative
decoding performance of the code [13]. Finding QC LDPC
codes with large girth has been the subject of several works, for
example, [12], [16], [6], [14], [18], [20], [4], [19], [3]. Fossorier
[6] studied the cycle structure of conventional QC LDPC codes
and presented some bounds on the lifting degree for having a
certain girth. He also showed that the girth of such codes is upper
bounded by 12. Myung et al. [15] also studied the cycle properties
of QC LDPC codes by deﬁning block cycles and considering the
overlaps between such cycles. They used this concept to obtain
an upper bound on the girth of QC protograph LDPC codes, and
rederived the upper bound of 12 on the girth of conventional QC
LDPC codes.
Kim et al. [12] extended the concept of block cycles by
deﬁning inevitable cycles and found all the inevitable cycles of
length up to 20. They also proposed a QC LDPC code construction that avoided all the inevitable cycles of length up to 12,
resulting in LDPC codes with girth larger than 12. However their
construction relies on using very large lifting degrees of N = 375
and N = 415 , which are not suitable in practice.

1

1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n, with each sub-matrix of dimension
N × N , arranged in m rows and n columns. The sub-matrix
˜
[H]ij in row i and column j is the circulant permutation matrix
corresponding to the edge {bj , ci } when hij = 0 ; otherwise,
[H]ij is the all-zero matrix. Following [1], we deﬁne the m × n
˜
matrix P = [pij ] by [H]ij = I (pij ) , pij ∈ ZN , where I (pij )
is a circulant permutation matrix whose rows are obtained by
cyclically shifting the rows of the identity matrix to the left by
pij , if hij = 0 , and pij = +∞, otherwise. Matrix P , called
the matrix of edge permutation shifts, or permutation matrix in
˜
˜
brief, fully describes H and thus the cyclically lifted code C.

covered in [6]. Moreover, the general technique proposed here
can be applied to girths even larger than 10. The derivations
however become more tedious as larger girths are considered.
The results presented in this paper can be used as part of the
toolbox to design QC protograph LDPC codes. They can help
in the selection of the base graph and its edge permutations, or
in choosing the lifting degree.
II. D EFINITIONS AND P RELIMINARIES
An undirected Graph G = (V, E) is deﬁned as a set of nodes
V and a set of edges E , where E is some subset of the pairs
{{u, v} : u, v ∈ V, u = v}.The degree of a node v ∈ V is
denoted by dv . A walk of length n in a graph G is a non-empty
alternating sequence v0 e1 v1 . . . vn−1 en vn of nodes and edges in
G such that ei = {vi−1 , vi } for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. If the two
end nodes are the same, i.e., if v0 = vn , the walk is closed. A
closed walk is backtrackless if ei = ei+1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1. A
backtrackless closed walk is called tailless if en = e1 . A closed
walk with distinct intermediate nodes is called a cycle. The length
of the shortest cycle(s) in the graph is called girth. Cycles of
length k are also referred to as k -cycles. In the sequel, we may
describe a walk only with its sequence of edges, or if there are no
parallel edges in the graph, just with the sequence of its nodes.
Lemma 1 ([8]): In a graph G with girth g, every tailless
backtrackless closed walk of length less than 2g is a cycle.

III. I MAGES OF C YCLES OF C YCLIC L IFTINGS IN THE BASE
G RAPH
It is known that the structures which map to cycles in a
lifted graph are tailless backtrackless closed walks in the base
graph [7], [2]. Consider a walk W of length l in G, with the
sequence of edges e1 , . . . , el . Suppose that, corresponding to the
edges, we have the sequence of permutation shifts p1 , . . . , pl .
The permutation shift of W is deﬁned as [1], [2]:
l−1

i(−1) pi+1 mod N.

Π=

(1)

i=0

The following theorem gives the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for a tailless backtrackless closed walk to map to cycle(s)
in the lifted graph.
Theorem 1 ([7], [2]): Let W be a tailless backtrackless
closed walk of length l in G with the permutation shift Π. Then
˜
the image of W , is a set of l-cycles in the N -lifted graph G, if and
only if Π is 0 and W does not contain any tailless backtrackless
closed walk with the permutation shift of 0.
According to Theorem 1, the permutation shift Π of a walk in
the base graph, and consequently the permutation shift assignment to the edges of the walk, play a crucial rule in whether the
walk is mapped to a cycle or not. However, there are situations
where the permutation shift of a walk is zero, independent of the
permutations assigned to the edges of the walk. This can happen
when the number of traversals of each edge in one direction
is the same as that in the opposite direction. In this case, the
permutation shift of the walk is always zero. The structures with
this property are called inevitable cycles [9]. Figures 1(a) and
1(b) show two important classes of inevitable cycles, called the
theta graph and the dumbbell graph, respectively [7].

A graph G(V, E) is called bipartite if the set V can be
partitioned into two disjoint subsets U and W (V = U ∪ W
and U ∩ W = ∅) such that every edge in E connects a node
from U to a node from W . We denote |U | by n and |W | by
m. Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs, in which
U and W are referred to as variable nodes and check nodes,
respectively. This implies m < n, which is what we assume in
the rest of the paper.
Consider the cyclic subgroup CN of the symmetric group SN
over the set of integer numbers ZN
{0, ..., N − 1}, with the
group operation deﬁned as composition. Consider the circulant
permutation πp in CN which corresponds to p cyclic shifts to the
right. We refer to p as the shift of the permutation πp .
˜
˜ ˜
Consider the following construction of a graph G = (V , E)
from a graph G = (V, E): We ﬁrst make N copies of
G such that for each node v ∈ V , we have N copies
˜
v
˜
{v 0 . . . , v N −1 } in V . For each edge e = {u, v} ∈ E,
˜
we apply a permutation πe ∈ CN to the N copies of e in E
˜ is called
The set of these edges is denoted by e. The graph G
˜
a cyclic N-cover or a cyclic N-lifting of G, and G is referred to
˜
as the base graph corresponding to G.
In this work, G is a Tanner graph, and we deﬁne the edge
permutations from the variable side to the check side, i.e., the
˜
set of edges e in E corresponding to an edge e = {b, c} ∈ E
˜
i π e (i)
is deﬁned by {b , c
}, i ∈ ZN . We denote the bi-adjacency
matrix of G by H, and refer to it as the base matrix. The base
matrix has m rows and n columns.
˜
˜
To the lifted graph G, we associate an LDPC code C, referred
to as the lifted code, such that the mN × nN parity-check
˜
˜
˜
matrix H of C is equal to the bi-adjacency matrix of G. More
˜
˜
speciﬁcally, H consists of a total of mn sub-matrices [H]ij ,

Fig. 1.

Inevitable cycles: a) Theta graph, b) Dumbbell Graph.

By ﬁnding the inevitable cycles of the base graph, one can
provide an upper bound on the girth of the lifted graph. This
is the idea used in [9], [10], [12] and [15]. In this work, we
use the dependencies among the permutation shifts of different
backtrackless tailless closed walks of the base graph. We show
that depending on the base graph and the lifting degree and
regardless of the permutation values, the permutation shift of

2

Fig. 2.

non-zero positions between any two rows or any two columns
of the base matrix.
It should be mentioned that since the size of the base graphs
is usually small, it is computationally very easy to ﬁnd αmax .
For the case where the base graph is an m×n fully connected
graph, α(ri , rj ) = n, for all i = j, and α(ci , cj ) = m, for all
i = j. Therefore, N must be at least αmax = Max{m, n} = n.
Corollary 1: In constructing a cyclically lifted graph with
lifting degree N using an m × n fully connected base graph
with no parallel edges, the necessary condition for having a
girth of at least 6 for the lifted graph is N ≥ n.
It should be mentioned that this bound is tight for prime
n. For example, consider the following matrix of permutation
shifts:


0
0
0
...
0
0

1
2
...
n-1


0

2
4
...
(2n - 4)N
P =
 (2)
.

.
.
.
..
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

Dependencies between permutation shifts of 4-cycles.

some of the tailless backtrackless closed walks shorter than the
inevitable cycles may necessarily be zero. This then dictates an
upper bound on the girth of the lifted graph, which is tighter
than the one imposed by inevitable cycles.
IV. D ERIVATION OF B OUNDS
In this paper, we consider the base graphs with no parallel
edges. This implies that the girth of the base graph is at least
4. Considering Lemma 1, it thus turns out that all the tailless
backtrackless closed walks of length 4 and 6 in such base graphs
are cycles.
A. Necessary Condition for g ≥ 6
According to the above discussion, all the tailless backtrackless closed walks of length 4, which may map to 4-cycles of the
lifted graph, are 4-cycles in the base graph. To avoid 4-cycles in
the lifted graph, one thus needs to assign the edge permutation
shifts such that the permutation shifts of all the 4-cycles of the
base graph will be non-zero. In the following, we study the
dependencies between the permutation shifts of 4-cycles which
have exactly 2 edges in common.
Figure 2 shows three 4-cycles C1 : u1 , w1 , u2 , w2 , u1 , C2 :
u1 , w1 , u2 , w3 , u1 , and C3 : u1 , w3 , u2 , w2 , u1 . Let Π1 and Π2
be the permutation shifts of cycles C1 and C2 , respectively. It
is then easy to see that the permutation shift of C3 is Π3 =
Π1 - Π2 . This means that if Π1 = Π2 , then Π3 will be zero, and
therefore it will map to a set of 4-cycles in the lifted graph. This
implies that to have a lifted graph with a girth greater than 4,
all the cycles of length 4 in the base graph which share exactly
2 edges must have different permutation shifts.
According to the assumption of no parallel edges in the base
graph, if two 4-cycles share exactly two edges, those edges must
have one node in common. For example, the two shared edges
between cycles C1 and C2 in Figure 2 have node w1 in common.
Consider any two rows i and j of a base matrix, and let α(ri , rj )
be the number of positions in which both rows have non-zero
elements. It is easy to see that α(ri , rj ) − 1 is the number of
4-cycles involving check nodes corresponding to rows i and
j, which share exactly two edges with one common variable
node. Similarly for any two columns i and j, α(ci , cj ) − 1 is
the number of 4-cycles involving variable nodes corresponding
to columns i and j, which share exactly two edges with one
common check node. Let αr,max = Max{α(ri , rj ) − 1}, 1 ≤
i, j ≤ m, i = j, and αc,max = Max{α(ci , cj ) − 1}, 1 ≤
i, j ≤ n, i = j. Then the lifting degree N must be at least
αmax = Max{αr,max , αc,max } + 1 to allow all the 4-cycles
sharing 2 edges with one common node to have different nonzero permutation shifts.
Lemma 2: For any QC protograph code constructed using
a base graph with no parallel edges, the necessary condition
for having a girth of at least 6, is to have the lifting degree
N ≥ αmax , where αmax is the maximum number of common

0

m-1

(2m - 2)N

...

((m - 1)(n - 1))N

where (k)N denotes the value of k modulo N . If the fully
connected base graph is lifted based on P and with the degree
of lifting N , where N is the smallest prime number satisfying
N ≥ n, then the lifted graph has a girth of (at least) 6. In
the case that n itself is a prime number (and thus N = n),
the lifted codes are called array based LDPC codes. Based on
Corollary 1, for a prime n, array based LDPC codes are the
smallest possible QC protograph codes, resulting from a fully
connected base graph, with girth 6.
B. Necessary Condition for g ≥ 8
For a base graph with no parallel edges, all the tailless
backtrackless closed walks of length 6 are cycles. That is, the
only structure which may be mapped to a 6-cycle in the lifted
graph is also a 6-cycle in the base graph. To avoid 6-cycles in
the lifted graph, one thus needs to assign the edge permutation
shifts such that the permutation shifts of all 6-cycles of the base
graph will be non-zero.
Consider the structure of Figure 3, where two 4-cycles share
an edge e = (u1 , w1 ). In Figure 3, there are two 4-cycles

Fig. 3. Dependencies between the permutation shifts of two 4-cycles having
one edge in common.

C1 : u1 , w1 , u3 , w3 , u1 , C2 : u1 , w1 , u2 , w2 , u1 , and a 6cycle C3 : u1 , w2 , u2 , w1 , u3 , w3 , u1 . Let Π1 and Π2 be the
permutation shifts of cycles C1 and C2 , respectively. It is then
easy to see that the permutation shift of C3 is Π3 = Π1 - Π2 .
This means that if Π1 = Π2 , then Π3 will be zero, and therefore
C3 will be mapped to a set of 6-cycles in the resultant lifted
graph. This implies that to avoid cycles of length 6 in the lifted
graph, all the cycles of length 4 in the base graph which share
exactly one edge must have different permutation shifts. We are
thus interested in counting such cycles. First, we consider the

3

special case where the base matrix is an all-one matrix. For
the given edge e = (ui1 , wj1 ), we consider all the 4-cycles
containing e. All such cycles can be represented in the form of
ui1 , wj1 , ui2 , wj2 , ui1 , with different values for i2 and j2 . For an
m × n fully connected base graph, i2 can be any value between
1 and n, except i1 (i.e., 1 ≤ i2 ≤ n and i2 = i1 ). This means
that there are n − 1 choices for i2 . Similarly, 1 ≤ j2 ≤ m
and j2 = j1 , i.e., there are m − 1 possible choices for j2 . This
means that there are (n − 1)(m − 1) distinct 4-cycles which
contain e. These cycles can share only one edge (edge e) or two
edges (edge e and one other edge), but not three edges because
there are no parallel edges in the graph. For the lifted graph to
have a girth of at least 8, all such 4-cycles must have different
non-zero permutation shifts. Satisfying this condition will also
satisfy the condition discussed in Section III.A, implying that
the lifted graph will not contain any 4-cycle or 6-cycle.
Lemma 3: For any QC protograph code constructed using an
m × n fully-connected base graph with no parallel edges, the
necessary condition for having a girth of at least 8, is that the
lifting degree N ≥ (n − 1)(m − 1) + 1.
Example 1: According to Lemma 3, in order to have a girth
of at least 8 in a protograph construction using a fully connected
3 × 5 base graph, the lifting degree must be N ≥ 9. The
following permutation matrix with a lifting degree N = 13
results in a lifted graph with girth 8.


1 7 0 10 7
(3)
P = 3 6 5 1 7
6 8 9 9 5
For an arbitrary regular or irregular base graph, the minimum
lifting degree for having a girth of at least 8, can similarly be
determined based on the maximum number of 4-cycles sharing
a speciﬁc edge.
Lemma 4: For any QC protograph code constructed using
a base graph with no parallel edges, the necessary condition
for having a girth of at least 8, is that the lifting degree N >
e
Max{N4 i }, where the maximum is taken over all the edges of
e
the base graph, i.e., 1 ≤ i ≤ |E|, and N4 i is the number of
4-cycles containing the edge ei .
e
It should be mentioned that N4 i can be computed easily
by subtracting the number of 4-cycles of the base graph after
removing ei from the graph, from the total number of 4-cycles
in the graph. Moreover, it is easy to see that for any edge
e
ei = (u, w), N4 i ≤ (du − 1)(dw − 1). This upper bound can be
used to ﬁnd an approximation for the minimum value of N .

Fig. 4. Structures in a base graph which may be mapped to 8-cycles in the
lifted graph.

W2 : w1 , u1 , w2 , u2 , w1 , u4 , w3 , u3 , w1 . Let the permutation
shifts of the 4-cycles w1 , u1 , w2 , u2 , w1 and w1 , u4 , w3 , u3 , w1
be Π1 and Π2 , respectively (see Figure 4(b)). The permutation
shift ΠW1 of walk W1 is then ΠW1 = Π1 - Π2 , and the
permutation shift ΠW2 of walk W2 is ΠW2 = Π1 + Π2 . In
order to have a girth greater than 8, the permutation shift of such
walks must be non-zero. That is the permutation assignment of
the edges must be such that Π1 = Π2 and Π1 = (−Π2 )N . In
other words, the permutation shifts of all the 4-cycles sharing
one speciﬁc node must be different from each other and be
different from the additive inverse of each other.
A similar investigation of Figures 4(c) and 4(d) reveals that
to avoid the 8-cycles in the lifted graph caused by the tailless
backtrackless closed walks in these ﬁgures, the permutation
shifts of all the 4-cycles that share two nodes (one edge) or
three nodes (two edges) must be different from each other and
be different from the additive inverse of each other.
For the case of Figure 4(e), one possible tailless backtrackless
closed walk of length 8 is W3 : w1 , u1 , w2 , u2 , w1 , u1 , w2 , u2 .
Let the permutation shift of the 4-cycle w1 , u1 , w2 , u2 , w1
be Π1 . Therefore the permutation shift ΠW3 of walk W3 is
ΠW3 = Π1 + Π1 = (2Π1 )N . That is, for having a non-zero
ΠW3 , (2Π1 )N = 0, or equivalently Π1 = 0 and Π1 = N/2 for
an even N , and Π1 = 0 for an odd N .
Given a base graph, by enforcing all (or some of) the constraints discussed above on the permutation shifts of 4-cycles
involved in structures of Figures 4(b)-(e), one can derive a lower
bound on the lifting degree that would result in a lifted graph
with girth at least 10. In the following, we provide such bounds
starting with the special case of a fully connected base graph.
Consider the structure of Figure 4(b). There are several ways
to count the number of 4-cycles sharing a speciﬁc node. For
instance, one approach is to subtract the number of 4-cycles
of the base graph after removing the node from the graph,
from the total number of 4-cycles in the graph. For an m × n
fully connected base graph, the number of distinct 4-cycles is
n m
= nm(n−1)(m−1) . Removing any variable node, the
4
2
2
number of 4-cycles in the resulting graph is (n−1)m(n−2)(m−1) .
4

C. Necessary Condition for g ≥ 10
Figure 4 shows all the possible tailless backtrackless closed
walks of length 8 in a base graph with no parallel edges.
Fig. 4(a) is a simple cycle of length 8. In Figures 4(b),
4(c) and 4(d), the walks consist of two 4-cycles which share
one node, two nodes (one edge) and three nodes (two edges),
respectively. One of the possible walks for the case of Figure
4(c) is speciﬁed using the arrows in the ﬁgure. In Figure 4(e),
the walks go through the 4-cycle twice.
We ﬁrst consider the case of Figure 4(b). Starting from
node w1 , one possible tailless backtrackless closed walk is
W1 : w1 , u1 , w2 , u2 , w1 , u3 , w3 , u4 , w1 and the other one is

4

Similarly, after removing a check node, the number of 4-cycles
in the new graph is n(m−1)(n−1)(m−2) . This implies that for a
4
fully connected base graph, each variable node is contained in
m(m − 1)(n − 1)/2 4-cycles and each check node is contained
in n(n − 1)(m − 1)/2 4-cycles. The consequence of this result
and the discussion presented earlier on the tailless backtrackless
closed walks of Figures 4(b)-(e) is the following lemma.
Lemma 5: For any QC protograph code constructed using
an m × n fully-connected base graph, the necessary condition
to have a girth of at least 10, is that the lifting degree N ≥
n(n − 1)(m − 1) + 1.
The fact that any two distinct 4-cycles which have at least one
node in common must have different non-zero permutation shifts
can be used to tighten the bound for special cases. For instace, for
a 3×n fully-connected base graph, it is easy to see that any two 4cycles in the base graph have at least one check node in common.
This together with the fact that there are 3n(n − 1) distinct 4cycles in such a base graph results in the following lemma.
Lemma 6: For any QC protograph code constructed using
a 3 × n fully-connected base graph, the necessary condition
to have a girth of at least 10, is that the lifting degree N ≥
3n(n − 1) + 1.
Example 2: Consider the TSF (155, 64) code [17], constructed using a fully-connected base graph of size 3 × 5 and a
lifting degree of 31. The maximum girth for the Tanner graph
of this code based on all the existing work is 12. This is while
based on Lemma 6, the minimum lifting degree using this base
graph which can result in a girth larger than 8 for the lifted
graph is 3n(n − 1) + 1 = 61. That is, using this base graph and
the lifting degree 31, the girth of all possible lifted graphs is at
most 8, regardless of the edge permutations used. It should be
mentioned that the girth of the Tanner graph of TSF (155, 64)
code is also 8, which is the highest possible based on Lemma 6.
Example 3: According to Lemma 3, in order to have a girth
of at least 10 in the QC protograph construction using a fully
connected 3 × 5 base graph, the lifting degree must be N ≥ 61.
A construction which achieves this bound is presented in [17].
For an arbitrary regular or irregular base graph, we have the
following result.
Lemma 7: For any QC protograph code constructed using
a base graph with no parallel edges, the necessary condition
to have a girth at least 10, is that the lifting degree N >
w
u
Max{N4 i , N4 j }, where the maximum is taken over all variable
nodes ui , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and all check nodes wj , 1 ≤ j ≤ m, and
w
u
N4 i and N4 j are the numbers of distinct 4-cycles containing
the variable node ui and the check node wj , respectively.
Note that, as the size of base graphs is usually small, it is
w
u
easy to ﬁnd the values N4 i and N4 j . It is also straightforward
du
u
to see that for any variable node ui , N4 i ≤ ( 2 i )(dw,max − 1),
dw
w
and for any check node wj , N4 j ≤ ( 2 j )(du,max − 1), where
dw,max and du,max are the maximum check node degree and the
maximum variable node degree in the base graph, respectively.
These upper bounds can be used to obtain an approximation for
the minimum value of N .
Example 4: Consider the (2048, 1723) rate-0.8413 regular
LDPC code adopted in IEEE 802.3an. This code is constructed using

a fully connected base graph of size 6 × 32 and a lifting degree of 64,
and its Tanner graph has girth 6. Table I shows the minimum required
lifting degrees for different girth values of a graph cyclically lifted
from a 6 × 32 fully-connected base graph.
TABLE I
M INIMUM REQUIRED LIFTING DEGREES FOR DIFFERENT GIRTHS OF A
GRAPH LIFTED FROM A 6 × 32 FULLY- CONNECTED BASE GRAPH .

Girth

Minimum Lifting degree

6
8
10

32
155
4961

Based on Table I, one can see that the code used in IEEE
802.3an has the highest possible girth.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the
error ﬂoor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213 - 2224, Apr. 2011.
[2] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of
irregular quasi-cyclic protograph codes with low error ﬂoors,” Proc. IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT11), St. Petersburg,
Russia, Jul. 31 - Aug. 5, 2011, pp. 908-912.
[3] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R.
V. Satyukov, “Some voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with
large girth,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT11), St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 31 - Aug. 5, 2011, pp. 732-736.
[4] M. Esmaeili and M. Gholami, “Structured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with
girth 18 and column-weight J = 3,” International Journal of Electronics
and Communications (AEU), vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 202-217, Mar. 2010.
[5] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes”, Proc. 2nd
International Symposium on Turbo Codes and their applications, Brest,
France, Sept. 2000, pp. 543-546.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from
circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8,
pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[7] J.L. Gross and T.W. Tucker, Topological Graph Theory, Wiley, NY, 1987.
[8] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “A message-passing algorithm for
counting short cycles in a graph,” CoRR, arxiv.org/abs/1004.3966.
[9] C. A. Kelley and J. L. Walker, “LDPC codes from voltage graphs,” Proc.
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT08), Toronto,
Canada, 6-11 Jul. 2008, pp.792-796.
[10] C. A. Kelley, “On codes designed via algebraic lifts of graphs,” Proc. 46th
Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing,,
Urbana-Champaign, IL, Sept. 2008, pp. 583-590.
[11] S.Kim, J.-S.No, H.Chung, D.-J.Shin, “On the girth of Tanner (3,5) quasicyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1729-1744,
Apr. 2006.
[12] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low density
parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
53, no. 8, pp. 2885-2891, Aug. 2007.
[13] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Communications, Finland, June 2001. vol. 1, pp. 41-44.
[14] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of large
girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707-3722, Aug. 2006.
[15] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894-2901, Aug. 2005.
[16] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large
girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718-727, Feb. 2006.
[17] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. E. Fuja, “A class of group-structured
LDPC codes”, Proc. of International Symposium on Communication Theory
and Applications, Ambleside, UK, July 2001, pp. 365-370.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and J. Daniel J. Costello,
“LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966-2984, Dec. 2004.
[19] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of high-girth
QC-LDPC codes,” Proc. 5th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and
Related Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 15 Sept. 2008, pp. 180-185.
[20] G. Zhang and X. Wang, “Girth-12 quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with consecutive lengths,” CoRR, arxiv.org/abs/1001.3916.

5

